Chapter 1: Efficiency
        
The eyes of Project Enigma’s head researcher opened. The researcher saw the inside of a stasis tube, a timer in the corner showing precisely four hours and two minutes had passed since entering. Shortly afterward the tube slid open, allowing the researcher to exit and to put on a white vacuum suit that completely enclosed the body. Exactly twenty-six seconds after waking, the researcher exited a closet-sized cabin and walked out onto the main hallway of Phoenix Station.
        Other personnel dressed like the researcher walked hurriedly through the hallway and the rest of the station. The researcher glanced out the transparent polymers directly in front to see a monstrous computer nestling in the station's center. Eight massive supports held it suspended and filled its metallic veins with liquid helium, cooling it as it performed an unfathomable amount of calculations every second. The computer formed the heart of Phoenix Station, which functioned as a military research lab. Everything else had been meticulously constructed around the computer in defensive layers to safeguard the most critical asset of the station. Even the staff’s cabins were built in a ring around the computer, an emergency barrier if the worst was to come. 
        The head researcher completed the ritualized five second respectful gaze at the central computer and mentally prepared to continue working on Project Enigma. Some of the other personnel in Project Enigma chastised such inefficient behavior. They saw every second as a constantly consumed resource. They had reason to their logic, the lab’s work was in fact proving vital to an empire which was slowly beginning to lose its war. But the head researcher and other members who thought similarly believed that a five second time expenditure was well spent in terms of morale.
        The head researcher took another eighteen seconds to enter Project Enigma's primary lab. Inside were the other members of the research team: Dana, Saris, Ethar, and Draston. When wearing a vacuum suit, each had no identifying characteristics except for a small name identifier, which the head researcher’s own suit display showed. 
        No greetings were said; each member had his or her sleep schedule, and because of the four-hour sleep thirty-hour work environment, there rarely was more than one member missing. This maximized the amount of progress they could make in a given time frame. Additionally, because of the stasis tubes, which significantly increased mental recovery during sleep, every member worked at peak efficiency. Even food was decomposed to the most nutritious, fastest digesting formula engineers had yet designed. As a result, a small nutrient mixture was given intravenously through the suit. This eliminated the need to eat, and it scarcely took more than a few seconds to refill a month’s worth of nutrients at a canister located in the lab. What little nutrient waste produced was quickly eliminated using the suit and disposed of just as quickly at a disposal station, also located in the lab. Many researchers adopted the practice of never leaving their vacuum suits to maximize efficiency in terms of taking it off before sleep and donning it afterwards. The practice was not initially implemented by the administrative staff of Phoenix Station, but considerations were being made to make it a policy to never leave the vacuum suit.
        The head researcher personally preferred to take it off to have a moment within one’s own skin as opposed to always leaving it on. Dana and Saris also shared the sentiment. Ethar and Draston were significantly younger team members, and never truly experienced life outside of a vacuum suit. But regardless of personal inclinations, the only thing that mattered was Project Enigma and everything else was just consideration for how the research team could perform labor more effectively.
        The head researcher activated a holographic display which interfaced directly with the most prized posession of Project Enigma: a fully operational Inter Systems Initiative heavy command mech. This captured engine of war had failed to detonate its core systems module. All of its secrets, heavily encrypted as they might be, were available to the scientists of the Alpha Empire. When the mech was captured, the Alpha Empire immediately scrambled to bring it to its most potent decryption device: the central computer of Phoenix Station, giving rise to Project Enigma.
        For the past six weeks, the head researcher personally led a team consisting of two communications specialists (Dana and Saris) and two algorithm specialists (Ethar and Draston) to decode the ISI's communications module and learn how the ISI transferred information. Other research teams used the mech to develop cyber warfare, data extraction, targeting, and optical software. They pried its electronic components mercilessly to find any edge the forces of the Alpha Empire desperately sought.
        The head researcher personally oversaw the communications team because the researcher felt it had the most promise. Being able to intercept enemy transmissions in real time on the battlefield would prove invaluable to any commander. The issue, however, was that after an entire six weeks spent pursuing every known frequency of light, the team still had made little progress. Dana managed to get the mech’s communication device functioning and transmitting, but when Saris tried to monitor what frequencies it was using he only got tiny bits of data which Ethar and Draston tried their best to decode but met with no success.
        The stress of having the entire Alpha Empire depend on work you are doing proved rather immense. Consequently, every member of the team pressed on without needing to be reminded of how desperately the technology they were decoding was needed. 
        
But as of the past two solar weeks, a different stress bore down on them. A single message was transmitted to each of them. They were told that the Alpha Empire was losing control of the sector of space in which Phoenix Station was housed. Military specifics were not relayed, but the sector commander stressed the inevitability of ISI victory in the sector. The only advantage still in their favor was that the ISI did not know the location of Phoenix station or the research it was performing


        The researcher currently selected different commands on a holographic display, looking back at the algorithm iterations Ethar and Draston had tried — unsuccessfully — to decode the ISI communications. Every time Dana had activated the communication device and measured the frequency of the wavelength it produced, the results came out as completely incomprehensible with not even enough of a pattern for the most advanced decryption algorithms. It was almost as if there was a large piece of data missing every time they activated the mech’s communicator. The head researcher kept looking over the previous attempts to understand how the ISI communicated and mentally fabricated potential solutions.
        Around the researcher stood Dana and Sarris, running more and more in depth scans with various machinery trying to see exactly what kind of data the communicator sent out. Ethar was sleeping and Draston worked at a terminal, making calculations the head researcher could barely even comprehend. The researcher knew that the team needed an overhaul, a new way of thinking or at the very least a new approach. But there were no hints. No clues to follow. And the longer they worked without avail, the more a general feeling of dread descended on them.
        Countless hours passed this way, with only the head researcher staring at the various pieces of the armored mech to decide how to crack its secrets. Trips to and from the sleeping quarters provided the only change in environment. The researcher dreamed of nothing else except the armored mech and was sure that the others felt the same way. The researcher took thirty seconds away from the communication team to ascertain the status of the other teams. Unfortunately, they had made even less progress.
***
        One solar week later an ISI probe arrived in the system. Gunboats were quickly dispatched to destroy the probe and they succeeded in intercepting it before it managed to leave the system and alert the ISI. Its disappearance was sure to be noted however, and a day later military command notified Phoenix station that a neighboring star system had just fallen under attack. The inhabitants of Phoenix station only worked faster, giving the central computer even more calculations to solve.
        The head researcher had an almost constant headache of trying to fit all the pieces of the metaphorical puzzle together in order to find out how the ISI communicated. Dark unhelpful thoughts became a constant threat to efficiency. Thoughts like…


The ISI will arrive any moment...
        ISI communication protocol is truly unbreakable...
        Many researchers had tried before the head researcher...
        The war was doomed anyway…


        But to every dark thought the head researcher had an automatic reply:


        Alpha Empire defenses in this system were robust.
        Any protocol that was created by humans and machines and could be decrypted.
        No prior researcher had the tools this researcher had.
        The Alpha Empire would prevail because it was destined to. When the time came, the researcher would return to Alpha Prime and ascend.


        And with those dark thoughts counteracted, the researcher continued running different simulations, diagnostics and in general just tried to understand the specifics of ISI communication. Because if the researcher could understand ISI protocol, the researcher could crack it and use it against the ISI.
***
        Several days later a trio of ISI probes arrived in the system from three separate directions. The local Alpha Empire forces only managed to destroy one before the others left the system to report back to the ISI the position of the lab and the surrounding military installations. The head researcher felt a sinking feeling after hearing this information.
 All the other members of the space station always wore their vacuum suits. As a result, facial expressions were completely invisible to others. But from very slight changes in the body language and stature of the others, the head researcher could clearly see the stations personnel, including the researcher’s own team, growing increasingly disheartened.
        Not long after the second probe incident, the head researcher received a message from Dana. 


        Ethar has not reported in seven hours. I feel concern.


        The head researcher immediately traveled to Ethar’s quarters. Once the door slid open, the head researcher saw Ethar still inside the stasis tube. The researcher began to worry and opened the tube and started snapping fingers in front of Ethar’s field of vision. There was no response but the head researcher’s own suit showed Ethar’s life signs were still normal. His brain activity was minimal. He had gone into stasis shock.
        When the head researcher returned to the lab seventy seconds later, there were three messages blinking in the researcher’s HUD. All of them stated the same.


        Ethar status update.


        The researcher responded with her own message to each of them.


        Ethar in stasis shock. Team membership temporarily terminated.


        The head researcher had called in a security officer and the officer’s subordinate drones to pick up Ethar and send him to the surface of the planet Phoenix station orbited; Belusia.
Advanced medical facilities were located on Belusia as well as a host of military bases, factories, orbital launch facilities and even a few small cities. Ethar would be well taken care of, stasis shock was far from unknown and very treatable given a week’s time. Often times during intense stress and stasis assisted sleeping, the mind failed to become conscious. Instead, the victim remained in stasis until a medically induced neural stimulation could rouse the victim into consciousness. At the moment, the head researcher was a member short in a team that had a seemingly impossible goal. But still the head researcher pressed on as did the rest of the communication team and the rest of the station. The researcher feared Draston might fall into stasis shock from the increased workload in Ethar’s absence. As a result, the researcher ordered Draston to stasis sleep for an additional half hour every cycle, bringing the total sleep to four and half hours for every thirty hours awake.
***
        Miraculously, when Dana used the ISI communicator to message for reinforcements, Draston was able to take the bits of information collected and decode enough of the message to comprehend it. The head researcher finally had some hope that Project Enigma was not a failure. Now they had something concrete to work on. A clue to pursue. The researcher felt pride in the research crew and sent each a tremendously heartfelt message.


satisfactory job.


It took all the willpower of the researcher to sacrifice potential time analyzing data to sleep. In the brief moments the researcher spent outside the lab; traveling to the stasis tube, messages were sent from other staff on the station that had heard of the project’s progress. Messages like.


You expand the empire’s power.
Efficient work..
Your progress has been noted.


These did little to strengthen the researcher’s resolve, but it proved a simultaneous reassurance and additional stress that others were watching so closely. The station’s commander herself had given the researcher’s team priority clearance to use the central computer. This meant that instead of waiting in a queue like the team had to before in order to carry out intense calculations, they now could instantly access the central computer for Project Enigma. The calculations of other teams would be paused until the communication team finished their work. This would prove very valuable since the researchers of Project Enigma were beginning to put together how the data was sent. Soon all that would be left would be to discover what kind of algorithm was used to encode the data. 


The head researcher prepared a massive report detailing the current status of Project Enigma. In it were the steps they had taken so far, estimated completion date, applications of the technology and a warning of the absolute need to keep the project top secret. If the ISI were to find out that the Alpha Empire had successfully cracked its communications, no doubt they would quickly change their communication protocols. The researcher also included the potential of cracking long distance communication in additional to just short range tactical communications.


After finishing the report, a messenger drone was launched from the station carrying the report as well as countless other information. It sped off away from Belusia and eventually phased to a different planet. Numerous other messenger drones arrived from the local star systems continuously. They updated their status and in some cases the strength of the ISI fleets in the vicinity. Although this sector of space was far from lightly defended, it was too far from the heart of the Alpha Empire to stand against a prolonged assault. Thus, the researcher faced the cold reality that less and less messenger drones were coming in from neighboring systems. 
After all, the researcher had sent the report before the project was completed because there was no telling if that was the last drone Phoenix Station would send.
***
Ethar was scheduled to return soon, having been mostly rehabilitated. His skills would prove invaluable, but not yet. Since the researcher’s understanding of the way the ISI sent data was incomplete, they still did not know where the other bits of data came from. Barely decoded information was almost as worthless as completely encrypted information. Until the researchers fixed the mysterious data problem, Project Enigma would be at a standstill and Draston as well as Ethar would have nothing extra to decode. Something was missing.
For days Dana, Saris and the head researcher thought of every solution as to why the data sent was incomplete. Saris even went as far as to say the communicator may be malfunctioning. Every possibility was thought out, tested and ultimately tossed out when proven it was not the reason for the lack of data transmitted.
They could feel it. All of them. They were on the cusp of understanding and decoding the ISI communications. They could give the Alpha Empire a way to strike back against the Inter Systems Initiative. Show them the power of Alpha Empire technology. But they couldn’t. Not yet. And it was slowly driving them mad, the thirst for a solution. For days their progress hit a standstill.


One day, while accessing a holographic display and interfacing with the components of the captured ISI mech, the head researcher received a priority message. The researcher looked at it and the text resolved itself in front of the researcher. It was from the sector commander.


Inter Systems Initiative forces detected leaving all surrounding star systems. Enemy battle groups forming up. Enemy assault on Belusia imminent.


The researcher stopped completely. Thoughts raced. The continuation of project Enigma. The loss of Phoenix station. Survival prospects. All these thoughts were flooding the researcher’s mind until a dominant one emerged and came into focus.


Project Enigma had to be finished no matter the cost.


The researcher forwarded the priority message to the other team members and thought. Really, truly and desperately — thought — in a way that the researcher had not thought yet.
Whether it was months in the making, a result of intense stress or somehow suppressed otherwise was unknown. But it was then that the researcher finally made the connection and turned to Dana. 


Run another scan.


What wavelength? She sent back without looking up.


All of them. And transfer the data immediately to Draston for decoding.


Now Dana did look up and turned to face the head researcher. Her body was completely hidden in her vacuum suit. Even her eyes were invisible behind the four optic cameras on the suit. But the way she slightly tilted her head let on how surprised she was. In that moment of surprise she stood straighter and brought a gloved arm up to where her mouth was behind the suit in a gasp motion. This was the most emotion the head researcher had ever seen anyone on the station exhibit. Oddly enough, it made the researcher feel good to see Dana express herself. But it was expected. Because the one thing the team had completely failed to do until now was quite literally put everything together.
        The ISI communication operated at almost every frequency. Data was distributed among many different frequencies and isolated frequencies were entirely incomprehensible. It was a simple and effective way of communicating freely across battlefields without the risk of others listening in. Having managed to decode anything off a single frequency was purely the genius ability of Draston and Ethar. All that was left now was for the data to be analyzed and decoded entirely to determine exactly what algorithm was necessary to understand enemy transmissions. After that, special equipment and decoding software would be produced and the Alpha Empire would be able to have a massive tactical advantage over its rival. This was the moment of glory, decrypting the data was only a matter of time at the hands of one of the most powerful computer in the galaxy. Project Enigma was a success. Nothing could ruin the excitement the head researcher felt. The relief and satisfaction. Nothing except for a single priority message.


        Enemy battle group sighted in system. Prepare for evacuation.




Chapter 2: Reckoning


        You are to immediately report to the Operations Room.


The head researcher stared at the message in the vacuum suit’s display. The message glowed yellow and contrasted  sharply against the background for maximum readability.
Over and over again the researcher read the message. This was real. This was happening. Never having seen combat before, the researcher felt uneasy. Of all the accounts relayed to the researcher, only one thing was for certain. There was no way in the entire galaxy to prepare for what was about to happen. ISI forces were well known for their brutality and willingness to slaughter all in their path. They never took prisoners except for brutal torture and experiments. It made the researcher have trouble catching breath. Made the heart race. 
But until ISI forces were at the doorstep, the head researcher had a duty to perform. One, final message was sent to all Project Engima members.


Communications team, situation dire. Project completion top priority. Use all Phoenix Station’s central computer’s processing power. Correct sequence for ISI encryption final task.


For the first time in weeks, all the team members stood absolutely still in the lab. They looked at each other from behind white vacuum suits and masks, exchanging faceless looks. Station alarms began to sound and the movement of personnel outside the lab intensified. The head researcher gave a quick nod of respect to the communication team and turned around. The rest of the team scrambled to their respective equipment and put the central computer to work analyzing and hopefully managing to crack the ISI algorithm entirely. All that was left was find out how the different wavelengths fit together to form a message. The hard part was already completed. But decrypting took time. And time was becoming exponentially more expensive.


***


The researcher walked opposite the direction of crew quarters. This time, a little map inside the researcher’s display highlighted a path to get to the station’s operations room. This was completely new territory. The researcher even had to take a ladder up to a different floor reserved for the military forces of the station. On that floor the researcher had to pass through an armory where men and women were putting on special two meter high infantry armored suits designed specifically for fighting in the cramped quarters of a space station. These suits were the smallest military hardware available. Infantry were the smallest units in all military operations, used exclusively in tight quarters like cities. Among the infantry suits, the ones meant for space operations were the smallest, and even still the researcher felt massively intimidated by the bulky suits. In the next room, similar looking infantry drones were coming online. Instead of people putting on suits however, the drones simply climbed out of storage compartments on the walls. The researcher felt a little calmer seeing that the Alpha Empire had insured the station was well protected.
        At last the researcher entered the barely contained maelstrom of command inside the operations rooms. Proximity messages were rapidly shot between the different officers manning their posts, attempting to bring Phoenix Station combat ready. Nothing was verbally stated, yet the researcher could scarcely keep up with the messages stacking. The researcher filtered them out and focused on looking around.
        The operations room was placed right above the central computer, still very close to the center of the kilometer wide station. It was responsible for coordinating the defense of the entire station and the rest of Belusia. At the very center of the operations center was Commander Athelia. She was already wearing her armored infantry suit and stood in front of a massive holographic display that showed the seemingly tiny station orbiting the massive Belusia. The station appeared blue and was joined by other blue dots around Belusia. But much further out from the display appeared a multitude of little red markings clustered in a group.
        Many other people were gathered around the display, all wearing the same infantry armor as Athelia. It was difficult to discern where the suit’s head ended and shoulders began, a design intended to prevent the wearer’s head from being blasted off. 
No one else wore a vacuum suit like the researcher however. Even the personnel operating various holo displays were fully suited up in infantry armor. This brought a slight feeling of vulnerability to the researcher. A feeling that felt incredibly alien to the researcher. But the researcher stopped contemplating feelings and instantly began listening when Athelia’s sharp, feminine tone cut through the air. It surprised the researcher greatly to hear Athelia speak out loud rather than send them messages.


        “Squad leaders, wing leaders, captains, fireteam leaders, fall in and prepare for your final briefing. Intelligence reports that the ISI has taken every ship in this sector and formed them up for their assault on Belusia. This effectively puts their other campaigns on hold and represents a massive effort on their part to dislodge us from this system. Now we all know that this station is carrying out vital research work so I have called in reinforcements from the surrounding star systems to combat the ISI fleet right here in this system. Unfortunately, most of the surrounding fleets have not yet arrived and we are heavily outnumbered. This means that losing this station and this world is a very real possibility. But we WILL NOT be evacuating. The work here is too vital to lose and we need to delay the ISI as much as possible. Having said that, we have predicted the ISI fleet’s strategy based on previous encounters so here are the specifics.
        “The enemy fleet consists of three cruisers, four destroyers and eleven frigates. Support vessels and transports are constantly entering and leaving the system. We expect the enemy to launch a full frontal assault with its cruisers and destroyers. As soon as the immediate orbit is clear around Phoenix Station and the station’s defenses are disabled, we expect them to send marines to board. If they make it that far, we are under strict orders to purge the datacores and, if absolutely necessary, destabilize the orbit of the station. The central computer is too powerful of an asset to be left in enemy hands.
        “Simultaneously, we expect enemy forces to position their frigates in the planet’s orbit and begin ferrying troops down to the surface to strategic points of value. Commander Yvan of the surface garrison has dug in against an assault of this caliber, so we expect to hold the planet for at the very least several weeks unreinforced. Even though we cannot expect to take back full control of the sector with our current forces, we intend to deal enough damage here and now with our current forces in this system to indefinitely stall their campaign in this sector.
        “Flight wings Constellation and Dusk will defend this station. Maintain close proximity to the station. Your primary objective is to prevent the enemy from boarding this station. Stay in range of the station’s lateral railguns for maximum combined firepower. Flight wings Yin and Yang, you will be joining frigates Eternal Paradise and Shieldbreaker and stay in low orbit to prevent enemy transports from reaching the surface. The more of their forces are stuck in orbit, the better the ground teams will be able to deal with enemy forces.


        “Infantry teams, each squad will cover a different area of the station. You must not let any hostile forces into the central computer or data housing of this station until the data is purged and the computer is taken offline. Once both those objectives are achieved and the station is in unrecoverable freefall, you are to use emergency lifeboats to reach the surface and bolster the ground defenses.”


        She looked at everyone around the holographic display, her faceplate retracted, showing her actual face. Everyone else on the deck was covered entirely, but she chose to show her face and she looked at the blank faceplates of every soldier in front of her.


        “To your stations. Flight wings, launch when ready. Infantry, to your positions. May we see the end of this day. For the Empire!”


        Very quickly the leaders all vacated the operations room leaving just Commander Athelia, a handful of officers and, in the very corner, the researcher. The researcher wasn’t quite sure what to do, and stayed very still. The military deck continued to feel very foreign. It felt like part of a life that the researcher was never meant to partake in. The rigid finality of every order and command. In the commander’s voice there was no mistaking she knew that not all the people under her command were staying alive.


Commander Athelia kept communicating tactical orders to all Alpha Empire forces around Belusia. The technology she used was similar to the technology the researcher had spent weeks deciphering. The researcher briefly felt a flash of terror when thinking that the ISI might have deciphered the Alpha Empire’s own communications. Too much thinking. While attempting to maintain calm, the researcher hadn’t noticed commander Athelia step away from the holographic display to not more than three feet away from the researcher. Servos hissed as pneumatic joints moved the massive bulk of her infantry suit.


“Researcher, I understand that your project is in its final stages?”


“Yes commander.” the researcher replied.


        “How long? All the stations resources are at your disposal and our primary security concern is your safety.”


        “One moment, I’ll contact my algorithm specialist.”


        Draston, how long until you finish completely decoding the communication algorithms?


        The researcher paused for a moment. “Commander, what about the bases, cities and this station?”


        “They are secondary to the completion of Project Enigma, which by extension, includes your safety.”


        The entire planet of Belusia. All the brave men and women who were defending it with their lives. All secondary to a single communication protocol. Reality was fast setting as to just how desperately the Alpha Empire needed this device. The researcher had a feeling that more than a single star system would be sacrificed if necessary. A very unsettling feeling. A message came back from Draston.


        Thirty to forty hours.
        
        “Thirty to forty hours commander.” the researcher said.


        “The ISI should waste a lot of time staying in formation and traveling to the station. They entered the system very far away, seems like they are using their typical cautious strategic approach.” Commander Athelia mused. “Stay right here. I want you informed of what is going on. You are to immediately notify me upon completion of the project.”


        “What about my team?” the researcher asked. Even though the vacuum suit slightly garbled speech, the commander picked up on the worry seeping into the researcher’s voice.


        “When Project Enigma is finished, they are of secondary importance.” the commander replied emotionlessly.


        “I see.”


***
        Twenty six hours had passed. Not a soul on the station had gone to sleep. Instead preparations were being made throughout. Bulkheads were sealed, barriers and cover erected. The communication’s team was hard at work finishing decryption as quickly as possible. But even with the central computer overclocked and solely under their command, the communication algorithm the ISI used was still uncracked. Other researchers were now under the orders to cease work on their projects and were instead ordered to destroy all the data they had spent half a lifetime collecting. Even the central computer was being prepared for deliberate sabotage. As soon as the ISI communication code was broken, the computer would be cut off from cooling and would quickly overheat. As it was right now, the liquid helium running through the computer was barely enough to keep it under control. It was overclocked to function faster but it was slowly heating despite the helium. Concerns were raised that not only were ISI boarding parties a threat, but also just as serious was the threat that the central computer would suffer a critical error from melting down. If the decryption took too long, overheating was a very real danger.


        All these preparations were being made, even the researchers were arming themselves with compact submachine guns. But the head researcher stood silently in the corner of the operations center under strict orders to stay there and wait until Project Enigma was completed. Commander Athelia was no idiot. She knew that the head researcher was useless in this final step of decoding. It was simply out of the researcher’s area of expertise. But still, the researcher felt the human need to spend time with the communication team. Instead the researcher was perhaps the only person on Phoenix station to do nothing. Nothing but stare at the holodisplay as the red dots drew closer to the blue ones. Nothing but watch Commander Athelia read updates and constantly send out orders to the surrounding ships. The rest of the station had the luxury of having a duty. The head researcher had no such luxury. Nothing to do but worry.
Commander Athelia wanted the researcher there because she wanted the researcher to be well aware of their tactical situation. The intricacies of how the enemy was attacking, where and how Alpha forces were defending. But the researcher was no veteran or military scholar. Half the terms Commander Athelia were completely new. What purpose was there in the researcher having to read to all this military jargon. But it was not the researcher’s place to object. Maybe the information from the operations center would somehow preserve lives.
***
The fighters of Constellation Wing circled Phoenix station cautiously. The ISI had chosen to leave their cruisers further back in favor of sending in their destroyers ahead with a full complement of their own starfighters. Currently there was a tense standoff as the enemy destroyers maneuvered into their final attack positions several thousand kilometers away from Phoenix station. The destroyers were dedicated anti ship vessels. Armed with dual railguns and numerous missiles launchers, they were a danger to anything in space. As if that wasn’t enough, they were armed with point defense turrets that were effective up to a thousand kilometers. It was clear that they intended to capture the station, just as Commander Athelia had predicted. This was probably why the substantially larger cruisers were kept back, to prevent their heavy guns from completely tearing the station apart. The station itself was armed with six heavy railguns that were defensively nestled along the central ring of the station. They would fire and reload as the station naturally spun to sustain its gravity. Additionally, the station had numerous point defense turrets just like the destroyers, intended mainly for enemy fighters and boarding craft. 
The fighters that composed both the ISI and Alpha Empire strike forces stemmed from shuttles used for exploration. Over time they were modified for faster acceleration and most importantly additional maneuverability. While a starfighter was rather heavy in a planet’s atmosphere, it still had almost no durability and thus its main protection was staying away from hostile fire through an intense series of maneuvers. But what it lacked in armor it made up for in firepower, a single squadron contained five to seven fighters which had more than enough firepower to take down a destroyer and seriously damage ships as big as cruisers. Fighter squadrons were composed of drones led by a single pilot from a command fighter. These drones received orders from the command pilot but otherwise behaved autonomously. This system was the basis of most military weaponry, a single soldier controlling a squad of drones. This ensured that squadrons had the battlefield flexibility and ingenuity that humans provided while still maintaining machine precision. This system had certain drawbacks too. Some commanders, especially in the ISI, were reluctant to over rely on drones.
But regardless, in drone squadrons, the human leader of a drone squad had a special vehicle. No matter if it was an infantry, mech, artillery, tank, airship or spacecraft. These command vehicles had special communications modules that were used in ordering the drones as well as communicating with other pilots and commanders. One such module, belonging to the ISI, was at the heart of Phoenix Station in the researcher’s lab. These communication modules were so integral to military operations that in case of pilot death, the communication module self destructed without fail. Except once. And once was all it took because in a few moments, the one mech that failed to destroy its communication module would give rise to a complete understanding of ISI protocol. If the Alpha Empire could get it off world.


Algorithm breakthrough imminent. Preparing to store all data.


The researcher read the message and instantly walked to Commander Athelia.


“The code has been completely deciphered. We have complete access to ISI communications. My assistant is saving all data now.”


        “Good.” Athelia said. “The assault is starting. All crews ready for immediate depressurization!” 


        Multiple air cycling devices began the process of sucking in the air for the entire station and storing it. It took no more than a full minute for every cubic inch of the station to become a complete vacuum. Every crew member was in a suit capable of withstanding vacuum and had a sizable oxygen tank. The whole reason for the depressurization of the station was in case part of the station ruptured into space. Instead of air violently escaping and throwing everyone out, the occupants would scarcely notice a difference other than the change of scenery. Gravity was usually also turned off to prevent a sudden loss of gravity from affecting the crew. But the entire station was a spinning centrifuge which made it much more difficult for enemy boarding craft to latch on. Also, the station’s defensive railguns relied on the spinning of the station to utilize all six effectively. As a result, gravity was strategically left on. Yet, nothing signified an incoming battle like a station wide depressurization.


***
        The ISI destroyers continued in formation and were now fully in range of the station and the station was in range of them. Phoenix Station gun crew C fired the first shot. The railgun hummed as it charged and released a tungsten rod at a tenth of the speed of light aimed straight at the enemy destroyers. It missed and would endlessly fly through space, but the station’s other railguns quickly joined in and the destroyers countered by firing their own railguns. A part of the station took a hit less than a second later and it's very frame shuddered as the tungsten rod ferociously embedded itself through several decks, transferring all of it’s devastating energy into the station.
        Enemy fighters broke formation and began descending on the station at attack speed. Alpha Empire fighters formed up to face the numerically superior force and waited until the enemy fighters were within striking distance. 
The ISI destroyers and Phoenix Station continued exchanging fire. A single ISI destroyer took a direct hit from a railgun that penetrated right through the entire central deck. In response, all four destroyers, including the damaged one, fired cluster missiles at the enemy which would impact in a little under sixty seconds. Phoenix Station itself responded in kind, missile tubes ejecting the quickly accelerating missiles and cycling in new ones.
The station continued to take railgun hits, but even though they impacted with tremendous force, they only damaged the first couple layers of the station.
        The enemy fighters finally reached strike distance of the Alpha Empire starfighters and  both groups accelerated to meet in combat. Missiles fired from the starfighters and swiveling autocannons silently expended thousands of explosive rounds. The starfighters began maneuvering around each other in a vicious dogfight around the station. The station itself unleashed a hail of tracers from its point defense turrets, filling the space around it with thousands of armor piercing rounds. Missiles that weren’t intercepted or outmaneuvered impacted brightly against starfighters, blasting them to pieces. Explosive rounds found their targets and mercilessly either tore their targets apart or sent them careening wildly into Belusia’s surface.
        Commander Athelia coordinated fire from the stations railguns onto a single destroyer, and multiple tungsten rods began impacting against and annihilating the destroyer. Scanners picked up internal explosions from within the ship as it began to crumble into pieces. Amongst the spiraling wreckage were a handful of escape pods.
        
        “All batteries, focus on destroyer two!” Athelia yelled.


        “Wing commanders, keep the enemy fighters within the stations point defense screen.”


        “Yin squadron, stay vigilant, enemy frigates approaching your position.”


        The cluster missiles launched by the destroyers split into dozens of smaller missiles, more than the station’s point defense systems could possibly handle. The point defense tracked and eliminated more than 90 percent in bright explosions scarce kilometers from the station. But dozens of these missiles exploded against its hull, sending concussive vibrations throughout the entire station. Half of the stations rail gun batteries were knocked out by the missiles, their crews vaporized or mortally wounded. Another gun battery was knocked out by a purposely targeted ISI tungsten rod that ripped through the weaponry and shredded its crew to bloody, armored chunks.
        
        The Alpha Empire’s cluster missiles broke apart into clusters of smaller missiles just like the ISI ones had. The destroyers had much more limited point defense than the station and managed to shoot down very few of the missiles. Most impacted on destroyer two, turning it into a quickly expanding ball of debris. Another destroyer took a few missiles hits that caused structural damage but it kept on firing.


        Commander Athelia noticed that the blue dots representing Constellation and Dusk wings were very few. She regrettably switched to the local channel that the fighters were using.


        “Another wave at point eight three, Dusk three take the leader.”


        “I just lost half my drones! These bandits are everywhere!”


        “Constellation leader is down! Taking over his drones.”


        “Can’t lock… can’t evade!”


        “By the Empire! Constellation leader is gone!”


        “Whose left? I’ve got no drones left and I got ISI coming out of-”


        The Alpha Empire fighters were being wiped out. No matter how valiantly and well executed their flights were, there were too few fighters in Constellation and Dusk wings to have any real chance of success. It didn’t take long until there were only three drone fighters remaining. They danced around the missiles and auto cannon rounds. They even managed to hit a couple of ISI fighters and send them crashing towards Belusia. But all three drone fighters, the last remnants of Constellation and Dusk wings, were targeted and destroyed by the dozens of ISI fighters swarming. The ISI fighters quickly turned their attention on the few point defense and the sole remaining rail gun on Phoenix Station. It, and the rest of the stations offensive capabilities, were surgically targeted and destroyed. The station was now defenseless against the boarding craft that were sent from the ISI cruisers. They approached quickly and matched the rotation of the battered Phoenix Station to land accurately. They were very careful to avoid the debris around the station from the wreckage of many fighters and large pieces of the heavily damaged station.
        In orbit around Belusia, Yin and Yang squadrons assisted the frigates Eternal Paradise and Shieldbreaker in sporadic and furious combat against enemy frigates and fighters. ISI transports began descending onto the planet’s surface.


***
        “Enemy troops are in the station. I repeat enemy troops are in the station. Attack enemy forces on sight!” Athelia yelled.


The researcher had remained standing in the same spot the whole time, lifting herself up when the occasional tremor shook the station, listening to the battle chatter and eyeing the holographic display anxiously. Many red dots had appeared from the bigger ones representing transports leaving the safety of the massive ISI cruisers. Now they were all around the station and the researcher could hear grinding and cutting noises coming from the floor. The pulsating sounds of rifles began echoing throughout the station, their muffled sound audible only through the floor. ISI forces were inside and forming a daunting onslaught. But Alpha Infantry were at every corner of the station ready to make sure that the secrets of Phoenix Station died with them.


“Researcher! Is the data ready?” Athelia yelled.


“Yes, it is on a data core in my lab.”


“Third squad!” Athelia cried out. “Fall back to the Ops Room and take the researcher to the communication’s lab.”


Twelve tan armored forms appeared through the doorway carrying assault rifles too heavy for a person with an unpowered suit to carry. One of them with slight yellow lines on its shoulders came straight up to the researcher.


“Follow me. Stay in the middle of the squad and immediately obey any orders I give you. Use the drones for cover.”


Without waiting for a reply, the pilot of third squad and all his drones immediately turned to the exit of the operations room and slid down the ladder to the research deck. The researcher went down the ladder after them but was not prepared for what lay there.


Gunfire flashed from multiple directions and two drones went down after armor piercing rounds slammed them into the hallway walls. One got up. On the ground were several researchers wearing the same white vacuum suits as the head researcher. Their bodies were badly mangled by weapons meant against armored targets, hands curled around submachine guns. The hallways were a ruin filled with giant holes from armor piercing weapons. The deck lighting was an emergency red and cast an ominous hue on the smoke that filled the corridors. A drone slammed the researcher against the wall and put its robotic, humanoid form in front, firing from its rifle. The researcher got a peek of navy blue ISI infantry at the far end of the hall where the researcher’s lab was. Third squad was advancing tactically, using wall supports as partial cover. It seemed the ISI at the end of the hall were outnumbered and third squad filled the end of the hallway with so many bullets that the forms there either retreated or crumpled under multiple penetrations. From behind third squad another ISI force appeared, opening fire. Third squad shifted positions, losing a few drone infantry in a flurry of sparks and shattered armor. They fell heavily on the floor. 
The drone that had been protecting the researcher took a pair of shots through its upper core and fell forward stiffly. Shrapnel from its suit flew treacherously out at the researcher and cut deeply into the vacuum suit the researcher wore. Instantly another drone stepped between the researcher and enemy infantry. The suit automatically sealed the damage with instant drying foam to prevent the suit from losing pressure to the vacuum of the station. Even still, the researcher was knocked on the ground from the shrapnel and gasped as air left the lungs briefly and the wound registered as pain. In the dazed state the researcher looked out the shattered window in the hallway that showed the central computer. Its core processor glowed bright orange and liquidated parts floated around it. It was undergoing a complete melt down. The master piece in engineering created by the Alpha Empire was now finally destroyed by the very own people that had built it.


The researcher looked up and struggled to get into a crouching position behind the protector drone just in time to see a tracer round tear straight through the side of third squads pilot. Instantly a message popped up.


From drone 4B. Pilot Gallus kia. Priority reach research lab. Run now.


Half the drones of third squad began racing towards the ISI at the opposite end of the hallway, pinning down those infantry but being destroyed in the process. The rest firmly stood their ground and continued raining armor piercing hell on the ISI, suppressing them momentarily.
The researcher paused for the briefest of moments before sprinting between the supersonic bullets flying around the station and into the lab. The door had been blown off completely and the researcher tripped over a navy blue motionless armored body that lay slumped against the wall. A trembling submachine gun appeared from behind the captured ISI mech in the lab. It was Dana. The researcher hurried over to her and Dana wordlessly attached the data core carrying all of Project Enigma to the researcher’s suit. Sarris lay close by against a wall, arms covering a massive wound. Draston was slumped over a holographic projector, hand still clutching a submachine gun. Both of their life signs read negative. The researcher put a hand on Dana’s cheek over her suit, trying her best to soothe her.


A tan armored drone rushed in the lab lightning fast, firing out as it came in.


From Drone 4B: Data module attained. Evacuate to lifeboat immediately researcher. 


The researcher replied.


I’m not leaving my crew behind.


From Drone 4B: Commander Athelia’s direct orders.


The researcher angrily pointed an index finger right at where the drones face would be had it been human.


“You tell her I am not leaving this station!” the researcher yelled.


Unable to execute command. COmmander Athelia has been killed. Final message as follows “Do not let the deaths of this crew be in vain.”


“Go.” Dana said, barely discernable over the gunfire tearing into the station. “I’ll cover you.”
        “You do the empire proud,” said the researcher, whose voice rang with sorrow.


        The researcher looked around the lab one last time, riddled with holes and the ISI mech lying in ruins. The lab had been so welcoming. So seductive to the mind and the need to study. But now it was cast in a red hue, dead team members lying motionless and wreckage everywhere. This was hell. Everything familiar razed in a single day.
        ISI infantry suddenly barged in and both the drone and Dana opened fire. The researcher fled through a rear emergency entrance that provided a cramped accessway directly to the nearest lifeboat. The researcher ran as fast as possible if only to avoid hearing Dana’s final screams as the ISI infantry brutally slammed armor piercing bullets into her unarmored form.


        But the researcher was not fast enough, and Dana’s final screams were heard. Even in vacuum the researcher heard them transferred through the ground and the scarce pockets of gas that were continuously leaking from the station.
        The researcher kept running, noticing the gunfire subside, replaced by the metal clanging of ISI marines in close pursuit. The entire station lurched and gravity ceased momentarily. The researcher had to push off nearby surfaces to reach the end of the emergency accessway to where a single lifeboat lay docked and ready for launch. Gravity then completely changed directions and the station began slowly tumbling into Belusia. Someone had initiated the self destruct protocol.
        The researcher dove into the lifeboat and sealed the door, strapping into a seat and slamming the launch button. ISI infantry rushed into the miniscule hangar and opened fire on the lifeboat right as it launched, scoring a few hits. The lifeboat spun as it left the free fall of the station, letting the researcher gaze out the viewport as flames from Belusia’s atmosphere began to engulf Phoenix Station.


        The fight for Phoenix Station was over. Neither side won control over it.


        But the fight for Belusia’s surface was just beginning, and the researcher held on with a death grip as the lifeboat spiraled right into the heart of the conflict.


Chapter 3: Planetfall


        Belusia slowly became larger as the lifeboat drew closer. Vast swathes of evergreen forest covered the equator and spread out to the north and south. Sandy, cold deserts and sandless steppe intermixed in giant stretches, bringing brown and gray to otherwise green continents. Within the forests were giant lakes and rivers, feeding the thirsty masses of trees.
Belusia’s largest continent stretched all the way from the equator to the north pole. It started out covered in forests and even occasional grassy plains. These gave way to deserts and steppe which in turn turned into tundra further north and eventually into ice covered plains and glaciers. The north had substantially more water and without the glaciers would appear as a massive sea with an archipelago spanning throughout it. But the great glaciers connected the various archipelagos making it a surprisingly stable landmass.
        Above the cold and peaceful Belusia were the heated and vicious explosions of sparring fighters and warships tearing each other to pieces. Crashing fighters were visible from the surface with the appearance of shooting stars. Bigger transports exploded furiously and disintegrated into thousands of metal chunks which quickly disappeared in the atmosphere. Barely visible glows occurred too. These came not from destroyed spacecraft but from drop pods which were quite literally dropped from orbital frigates and descended far faster than the sound barrier. They were incredibly difficult to shoot down and took only three minutes to reach the surface. Inside each pod were several Inter Systems Initiative infantry or even a single mech. Aircraft also descended, but not nearly as quickly.
        Belusia was already crawling with ISI units in various places all over the planet, mostly but not exclusively near the equator. Drop pods had been deployed around the clock over the past couple of hours, and the vast majority of transports were having no problems landing. The first group of these dropships were landing just now with many more following close by. Alpha Empire forces in orbit were now resorting to hit and run tactics, but these were minimally effective. Soon, only the surface forces would be left. But the two Alpha infantry divisions and armored division garrisoned should never be underestimated, regardless of how much the ISI outnumbered the defenders.


        The researcher continue to gaze out the lifeboat. The furious orbital battle that moments ago seemed to be waged right next to the researcher was now a sizable distance away. When looking at the viewport that faced the battle, the blackness of space was slowly becoming colored by the teal atmosphere of Belusia. The lifeboat itself was shaking substantially upon reentry to the planet’s surface. The researcher held on tightly, turning to look at the viewport that showed the surface. It seemed so calm and tranquil. So much green and brown and white. No fiery red and yellow dotting the surface. But the fight would engulf these areas too. 
The researcher resorted to consciously denying everything that had happened aboard Phoenix Station. Pretended that the station was still in one piece and everyone aboard it was working as usual. But as powerful as denial was, the screams and bloody images from the station burned brighter.
        An immensely bright light on par with a star suddenly appeared causing the eyes of the researcher to instantly shut. Seconds later the researcher opened them and gazed at the super massive explosion. The researcher buried head in arms as the lifeboat continued to trundle towards the planet’s surface. Phoenix Station was completely and utterly gone.


        A few minutes later a message came through to the researcher from the surface.


        From Lieutenant Thesper: Researcher, I am in command of this region and your safety has now been made my responsibility, sending coordinates. Add them to your lifeboat’s navigation and land there. A detachment will be waiting for you. 


The researcher did as told and transferred the coordinates to the lifeboat in order to shift course. But when the lifeboat activated its maneuvering engines, it heaved and spun, quickly losing control. The researcher in an adrenaline fueled state scanned the display to see what was wrong, trying very hard not to panic. One of the maneuvering engines had been completely destroyed when ISI personnel had shot at the lifeboat back on Phoenix Station. Thankfully the damage was on the engine and not on the lifeboat’s superstructure, that would have proven fatal upon reentry. But the lifepod continued to spin wildly as one engine was left on without another to counteract it. This forced the researcher to cancel the maneuver, leaving the lifeboat to slowly level out with a minor stabilizer in place of the destroyed engine. Even still, this left the researcher with a projected landing site almost a hundred kilometers away from the one Lieutenant Thesper had prepared. 
Belusia’s surface was fast approaching. The researcher looked at the viewport in fear as glacier after glacier passed underneath. This was not the ideal place to land. Not by far. But it was out of the researchers control.


Canisters of instant drying foam detonated as intended throughout the lifeboat, filling it with the shock reducing substance. Moments later the craft slammed into water. Sick metal crunches were all the researcher heard as the craft skidded on the water and flipped entirely, becoming airborne again. The researcher was held inside by the foam and harness, but just barely and with an intense feeling of vertigo. The craft slammed down once more, this time into a glacier and embedded itself in its side. Chunks of glacial ice flew in every direction. The cracked surface ice on the water bounced perilously from the impact waves. 
The researcher undid the harness and waved both hands around wildly to clear away the foam which covered everything. The inside of the craft was suddenly very dark. All the displays were down and even the emergency lighting had refused to show. The researcher slapped the left shoulder of the vacuum suit and a suit light turned on. It took power, but so did many other suit functions and the researcher still had a substantial amount left.
The researcher meticulously found a way to the exit hatch and with full force tried to open it. It budged… a little. But since the researcher had no powered armor and the lifeboat was dead in terms of power, it would take a while. Outside, the sound of cracking ice came. The researcher quickened the pace and put full strength into opening the hatch. Once sufficiently loose, the researcher kicked it open and had to cover both eyes against the sudden brightness that came from outside. The ice just made everything worse, reflecting all the light from Belusia’s home star.
The researcher felt around for the edges of the hatch while blinded, but overestimated the distance and reached out too far. This put the researcher off balance and led to a panic stricken moment right before the researcher fell out onto the ice below. A second later the researcher landed, hard. The ice bobbed up and down on the water but it held the researcher’s fall. Pain coursed through the researcher and caused fists to clench as the feeling pulsated through the researcher’s back. 
        The eyes of the researcher finally opened and thanks to the optical filtering of the vacuum suit, the researcher now could see. Above was the lifeboat, its structure heavily dented. It was embedded in a colossal glacier. The researcher turned to look at the ice, it was a deep aquamarine and fairly translucent showing its darker depths. All around the researcher were the glaciers, most solid and massive, others floating in the water along with surface ice that covered most of the ground. Everything was a vivid royal blue, teal or white. It was beautiful, something the researcher had never really seen.
        The wonder was short lived. The researcher saw little pieces of ice falling from above. There was a loud crack and the entire lifeboat disattached from the ice and fell straight down. The researcher rolled to the side as quickly as possible. The lifeboat landed on the ice, cracking it instantly and sinking into the water. This caused the ice to sharply jolt like a pendulum and shoot the researcher into the air and into the glacier. The researcher impacted with the glacier, slamming headfirst into it, and fell right into where the lifeboat was sinking. Water quickly filled the researcher’s vision and both hands shot out, struggling to reach anything. The lifeboat kept sinking towards the abyss below. Within the dark depths, sea creatures stirred to observe the wreckage. The researcher looked back up and kicked wildly, trying to stay afloat. Of all the things the researcher was trained for, swimming was not one.
        The researcher started to lose energy while trying to reach the surface. Panic seeped into the mind as the researcher contemplated which was worse, falling deep into this arctic abyss or catching the attention of the sea creatures that stirred below. The vacuum suit was still completely sealed and had enough air to make sure the researcher would get very deep before suffocating or more likely, dying from pressure. A single thought raced to the forefront of the mind, forcing the researcher to override air control and inflate the vacuum suit.
Even though the researcher was still in massive pain from the fall and the slam back into the glacier, the researcher’s limbs moved even faster and the researcher managed to get to the surface and grab onto ice. It was slippery and tough to hold on with little purchase. But the researcher swung a leg around onto the ice and gradually rolled onto its surface. The researcher’s heartrate was so high the suit sent a little warning. This did not concern the researcher as much as the cold. The suit fended off the cold fairly well, but the shrapnel punctures from earlier on at Phoenix Station were filled with self sealing foam that was not designed to be insulating. Thus the foam lost heat through the puncture very quickly and the suit was struggling to compensate.
Cold, pain, unfamiliarity. All feelings the researcher had rarely, if ever, experienced. All at once they proved… overwhelming. The researcher laid on the ice, experiencing all of these feelings, listening to the gentle lapping of water against the ice. Different thoughts began to manifest as well. When the researcher had left Phoenix Station, almost all the lifeboats were still docked. Grief came like a massive tidal wave. Manifesting itself in the researcher upon the realization of just how many people didn’t make it planetside. Loss, sorrow, uncertainty. This is what the researcher was unprepared for.


A message came, made evident by a red message light within the researcher’s field of view. Overtaken by grief, the researcher looked away from it. It meant more combat, more death and more tragedy. Any more and the researcher was sure to become as mindless as the drones that continued the fighting. But the researcher still felt a gradually increasing sense of duty and did not forget just how important the data capsule being carried was. The thought alone was enough to serve as a undeniable call to action.
At the critical moment before the feelings of loss demoralized the researcher completely, the researcher blocked them out. They were inefficient and the deaths of everyone on that station would not be in vain. With newfound determination, the researcher opened the message.


From Lieutenant Thesper: Position located. sending forces to sync up with you. ISI forces have been alerted to your presence. head south as quickly as possible.


The researcher stood up tentatively. The ice underfoot was slippery and very difficult for the researcher to walk on. All around the valley of glaciers glistened under Belusia’s sun. The winds howled ghastly arctic melodies. With arms clutching body for warmth, the researcher began trekking across the ice and into the valley of the glaciers.


***
        Looking up provided no more sights of distant fireballs. No skyward trails akin to shooting stars. The fighting in orbit was over and the sky, the ground and the water all seemed so peaceful. The sun began its final descent past the horizon, casting sharp and varied colors from crimson reds to dark purple, all reflected in a dazzling display through the ice. The winds began to pick up even more, and the further the sun descended, the more snow became airborne and began to block the researcher’s vision. 
        Before the sunset, the researcher managed to see several of the marine life of the planet and even a handful of winged creatures. Now, however, temperatures began to dip dangerously low, a human without a vacuum suit would have surely perished by now. Even the researcher in the insulating and self warming vacuum suit was beginning to feel painfully cold. The damage on the suit from earlier seeped heat at an alarming rate, and even with the suit’s self warming mechanism, it could not replenish the lost heat.


        Not all was lost quite yet. The researcher approached the end of the glacier valley which connected to solid, albeit frozen land. By now, the sun had set and the brightness of nearby stars were all that could guide the researcher. The researcher did not dare turning on a light for guidance in fear of being spotted. Still, less than a kilometer remained until the researcher could get out of the ice.
        Currently, all the researcher heard was snow crunching underfoot and the wind that battled the researcher for every step made. That battle was becoming harder every second. All of the researcher’s limbs were starting to go numb, especially the legs.
        The researcher’s wandering thoughts began to focus on the present. The thought of putting one foot in front of the other. The thought of the snow and the gradual ice forming on the vacuum suit. The thought of the all encompassing cold that caused wild shivers. But not even the physical cold could make the researcher as cold as the sudden message that had just come in.


        Hide.


        Terror and adrenaline fueled the researcher. It was hard to discern the immediate surroundings, but the researcher decided to make a run to one of the valley walls. Halfway to the glacier, the researcher’s leg went straight through the ice and into the water below. The distant whine of aircraft engines began to draw close.
        The researcher shook off the shock, used both arms to pull the leg out of the water and continued to sprint toward the glacier. The researcher stopped, put both arms on the glacier and began feeling the ice for any sort of cover. The sound of aircraft grew closer and the researcher began to feel past the ice wall even faster. Moments later, the researcher found exactly what was needed; a tiny little ice cave that led into the glacier. The researcher got on all fours and crawled into it. If not for spending years on space stations, the claustrophobia would have been too much to handle.
        Several meters in, the researcher froze in place and stayed as absolutely still as possible, listening for any sounds penetrating the howling wind.


        No sounds came. But tremors did. The ice around the researcher trembled and cracked in places. Vibrations shook the researcher. Something momentous walked above. That’s when the researcher heard it, the joints of a mech as it walked far above on the glacier. It wasn’t alone either, at least two other pairs of footfalls echoed around the researcher, along with the jet whine of an aircraft circling overhead.
        The ISI were right here, all around. If they found the researcher, which it seemed extremely likely at the moment, the researcher vowed to smash the datacore being carried and to leave the protection of the vacuum suit before they managed to extricate the researcher.A moment like this called for a sacrifice of this magnitude. With the data already sent, the Alpha Empire would be able to replicate what the researcher had done in several months time. A year at most. But if the researcher let the data core get into enemy hands, everything done up to this point would have been meaningless, as they would switch all their encryption. The researcher prepared for a mad sprint out of the ice cave and into the depths of the ocean.


        The ice continued to shake. ISI forces were actively patrolling this region. The researcher doubted they could accurately track the vacuum suit or any thermal readings but fear began to creep in. The very presence of the ISI in such close proximity scared the researcher. They had no reason to be this close, the glaciers spanned thousands of kilometers. Why were they so threateningly close. No longer could the researcher tell the difference between the shaking of the ice and the shaking of the researcher’s own body. The cold, fear and fatigue settled in quickly, and in the underside of a glacier, the researcher completely lost consciousness.
***


        A thunderous roar and the subsequent shaking of the ice jolted the researcher awake. Looking around and through the ice it was daytime again. Another tremendous sound caused the ice to slightly crack. The sounds of supersonic gunfire and missiles erupted all around outside the glacier. 
        The researcher tried moving but every limb had a substantial amount of ice on the surface. It took a solid thirty seconds for the researcher to regain full movement. After, the researcher checked the suit for messages that may have been sent overnight. But there was no flash. There was no nothing. No temperature readouts, internal compass, nothing. The battery was completely expended and the suit had completely run out of power. The internal heater had completely used up the battery overnight and kept the suit just warm enough for the researcher to stay alive. Just barely.
        The researcher was thoroughly cold and didn’t need the suit to tell that body temperature was critically low. This prompted a flash decision. Even though gunfire was erupting outside, if the researcher stayed in the glacier, death would surely find another victim. So the researcher began to crawl outside and promptly regretted it.


        Smoke from a half dozen charred wrecks drifted into the sky. Tracer rounds and missile trails flew between glaciers. Chunks of ice burst into steam from missed shots. The researcher didn’t actually see any of the mechs, they stayed out of the valley, but aircraft continued flying overhead both firing and dodging missiles.
        Dark, eight meter high forms came into view on the highest glacier. They let loose vicious bursts at targets out of the researcher’s vision. The rapid gunfire of the mechs let out a thunderous crack every time a round was fired. 
        In a split second, a missile that came out of view slammed into one of the mechs knocking it off its feet. All the mechs standing on the glacier turned and let loose a volley of missiles which promptly brought a gunship careening into the snow culminating in a blossoming explosion and a cloud of steam. 
        The researcher looked at the mechs more closely. The shape and details were hard to tell at this distance. But the researcher was certain, those were ISI mech units. After studying one for months, the distinctions were obvious. And the researcher was now in clear view of them.
***
        There were four mechs, one had gone down and two were taking up patrol positions. The remaining one fixated itself right at the researcher. Nearby, missile and bullet impacts had put giant holes in the ice and glacier walls, providing plenty of easy access points into the water. The researcher took a deep breath and eyed the mech warily while looking at the closest impact through peripheral vision. There would have to be no hesitation. If the mech tried to capture the researcher, the researcher would have to jump into the water and sink into the dark abyss below. The suit was rather heavy and would have no trouble sinking quickly. It was also completely out of power and would have minimal oxygen. The suffering would quickly be over.


        The mech on the ridge didn’t move yet, but the longer the researcher fixated on it, the clearer the distinctions of the ISI mech were. It was the same exact model the researcher had worked on. A standard all-purpose armored mech command unit. It had two dangerous autocannons that both fired supersonic rounds the size of a human hand as well as at least a dozen high explosive smart missiles.


        If the pilot in that mech wanted the researcher dead, the researcher would be dead.


        It took a step closer to the edge of the glacier, and another. It was testing the researcher. A few more meters forward and the mech would have to descend into the ice valley where the researcher stood. And the researcher was ready. Every step closer only increased the resolve to make sure the data carried did not give away the entirety of the Alpha Empire.
        In the blink of an eye, a giant explosion hit the glacier and threw gigantic pieces of ice into the air in all directions. It had hit one of the patrolling mechs and there was absolutely nothing left of it. A second later the shockwave hit the researcher and knocked the researcher onto the ice back first.
        The command mech braced as another explosion occurred between the command mech and the remaining one on patrol. The glacier was being utterly annihilated by artillery. The royal blue ice became a stark background against the billowing orange and red explosions as more artillery shells struck the glacier. The remaining mech on patrol was blasted into several pieces, leaving only the command mech.
        In a move of pure desperation, the mech quickly hopped off the glacier, unto the ice below, attempting to get away the artillery. The researcher watched the heavy piece of machinery fall towards the ice and slam right through it, slowing for a moment before it began to sink. No doubt the pilot was trapped in that mech, sinking ever deeper into the water and out of view, inevitably succumbing to the pressure of the ocean’s depths.
        But with its sinking, and the adrenaline wearing off. The researcher, who still hadn’t gotten off the ice, slumped back and unconsciousness took hold. The cold, fatigue and shock had claimed their toll, and the last thing the researcher could hear was the whine of yet another approaching aircraft.


Chapter 4: Ruination


        Among the core tenants of the Alpha Empire was the emphasis of technology and its role in human evolution. The people of the Alpha considered technology to be almost a form of salvation. The next step in humanity’s evolution. The highest priority of the Alpha Empire was: The continued technological progress in all fields of study to allow humans to transcend into something greater.
        Of course transcendence was not a daily goal of its citizens. It was more of an objective on the horizon of mankind that the Alpha Empire sought to achieve through eventual progress. But it did strongly emphasize progress. And the required efficiency towards that progress. The very things that gave the Alpha Empire its soul were the almost communal drive to move past the weaknesses of humanity and to forge a better future.
        But the great ideals of the Alpha Empire were strained by the ISI. The massive war taking place between them halted all non military research. Factories were commissioned to create machines of war and citizens educated only enough on how to factor in weapon ballistics or maneuver starfighters. The great ideals of the Alpha Empire would have to wait until the ISI was no more. 
The ISI itself held no technological ideals. For the Inter Systems Initiative, the ideal had already been reached. Instead it hungered for power. Its soldiers desperate to slaughter in its name. The ISI was blinded by its own decadence. A hateful entity intent on rooting out any progress and consolidating all resources for itself.  The Alpha Empire stood valiantly against it. Against the evil aggressions of the selfish and weak people that made up the ISI. The ISI were an affront to everything the Alpha Empire stood for, and without the researcher’s data core, the Alpha Empire would lose to the savagery of the ISI.


***


The eyes of Project Enigma’s head researcher opened. The researcher saw the inside of a stasis tube, a timer in the corner showing exactly one hundred sixty-two hours and fifteen minutes had passed since entering. Shortly afterwards the tube slid open, allowing the researcher to exit and to put on a white vacuum suit that completely enclosed the body. Exactly forty-six seconds after waking, the researcher exited a closet sized cabin and walked out onto a main hallway.


But this was not Phoenix Station.


Distant rumbles shook the ground. The hallway the researcher stood in was white and not the metal grey of Phoenix Station. Medical personnel walked through it with special lenses, scalpels and other equipment attached to their suits. At the far end of the hall was a line of injured civilians. Red stains contrasting sharply against the white of the vacuum suits they wore.


A message appeared for the researcher. 


Follow indicated path to Lazarus City Command Center.


The researcher followed the vacuum suit’s instructions, noting it was not the same one the researcher wore before becoming unconscious. The researcher stretched extended all ten fingers on both hands, ensuring they were still attached. They felt very sensitive. Also, a pain came from deep inside the researcher’s side. Every step also brought a slight feeling of uneasiness from the researcher’s ribs. It was easy to remember what happened to cause the pain. But everything else surrounding the past week was cloudy in the researcher’s mind.
The researcher had to focus on the path ahead to avoid running into the medical personnel that frantically walked past the researcher. The researcher looked at the doorway the navigation system said to pass through. A sign above it read: Military Wing. Inside were individual work stations with row upon row of doctors and machines operating on infantry, most still in their armored suits. The researcher watched as a soldier was moved onto one of the stations and had several pieces of armor removed, revealing bloody trauma underneath. Further on were non-infantry units. These were the units in tanks, mechs or other vehicles. Rarely were there any wounded from those. The ones that were being operated on were missing legs, arms and even torsos. Most were badly burned and looked almost like living, screaming bags of coal. The Alpha Empire had removed ejection devices from its vehicles years ago to stop pilots from preemptively abandoning their vehicles. Now vehicle pilots had no choice but to stay inside.


Past the military wing was an underground magnetic train station. They were standard across all Alpha worlds. On Belusia, the proximity to ISI planets had forced the mag railways be constructed underground. 
A magnetic train appeared and silently stopped at the station. Wounded both standing and unconscious quickly disembarked or were carried out. When they exited the researcher got in the mag train, essentially a tube with forty seats. No one else got on. It silently sped up and traveled underground for thirty seconds under the city of Lazarus, capital of Belusia. After the brief trip it stopped and its doors opened to an empty underground station. The researcher stepped out and paused for a moment upon looking out. 
There was a map of all the stations the mag rails connected to. Because of the vast improvements in magnetic transportation, these rails could easily surpass two thousand kilometers per hour. They connected all the major cities on Belusia and many smaller settlements as well. 
The researcher tapped a holodisplay and had the map zoom out to show the entirety of Belusia’s largest continent. Almost every single mag rail line to other cities had been either destroyed or purposely disabled. The researcher was unsure if this was the ISI destroying infrastructure or if Alpha Empire forces had disabled them to keep the ISI out. But the situation seemed desperate. The possibility of the Alpha Empire actually losing Belusia to the ISI… the researcher had spent every conscious second of an entire life on Belusia or in the orbiting Phoenix Station. It seemed impossible that it would become ISI territory. That the Alpha Empire way of life would be wiped clean from this planet. 


Another message appeared.


Please hurry.


***
        Lazarus City’s Command Center resembled a bristling ziggurat. It monitored and controlled the largest city on Belusia: Lazarus. It was half underground half above ground, civilian administration of the city occupying the exposed upper half and military administration the entrenched bottom. Belusia’s primary military command center had been on Phoenix Station. Now that the station was gone, the next world command center was the command center of Lazarus City. Inside it brimmed with activity. The upper civilian levels were unreachable to the researcher, but the main military center was absolutely massive. Dozens of controllers lay strapped into their equipment, neurally controlling the quickly collapsing defenses of the planet. The researcher looked at a sphere hologram representing Belusia. It had numerous red shapes surrounding it and many more on its surface. There were very few blue blips on the surface, all but the smallest utterly surrounded by red blips.
        A few infantry armored suits stood guard at the entrances, but besides that there was no one standing like Commander Athelia, shouting orders and receiving updates. Here it was silent. Despite the dozens of controllers dishing out thousands of orders to forces all across the planet, no one stirred. The neural links that connected each controller to their station made no movements necessary. Every thought became an order for them. So they just silently lay strapped to their stations, no one even so much as stirring. When the researcher looked at each controller and saw their ID, eventually one showed Commander Yvan. The commander was also strapped in and silently staving off the ISI.


A message popped up from the Commander.


You are here. Good. ISI forces preparing for city assault. Situation critical. Alpha fleet may come to assist. Priority escort you off this planet to Alpha Prime. 


It disturbs my soul to put you before this city. Do not fail.  


An unarmored, vacuum suit wearing person strode into the room and walked straight up to the researcher.


“Please follow me. I will assist in activating a heavy infantry platform.” she said.


“What for?” The researcher asked, a little confused.


“Commander Yvan’s orders. You are to wear a heavy infantry suit for personal protection.”


        ***
        The woman, Tech Lieutenant Griffin, led the researcher to an armory where robotic arms automatically encased the researcher in an armored suit. She explained to the researcher the differences between normal movement and movement in a powered suit. She guided the researcher in the various commands and functions available in the suit. She then promptly exited and the researcher returned to the Command Center’s war room. Or tried to return. The armored suit was radically different from a vacuum suit. Where the vacuum one contoured to the body and allowed for natural movements, this one required an over emphasis of every movement so the rest of the suit could allow for the motion. The researchers head was nestled roughly where the chest of the suit was. Although this provided a massive protection boost for the head, it made it very difficult to get used to having your head not be the highest point of the body.
        Now however, the researcher looked identical to any other soldier on the battlefield. Whatever infinitesimal hesitation the ISI troopers had for someone wearing a vacuum suit would no longer apply. This, of all things, scared the researcher. Still trying to wrap around the concept of Phoenix Station being gone and the rest of the researchers dead was difficult and unwanted. But the sudden knowledge of how merciless the ISI would be on the researcher led to sudden clarity. And this sudden clarity brought with it a terrible gut wrenching feeling of loss and fear. The lifeless red and blue blips on the holographic display could not possibly convey the reality. The reality of bombardment going on. The reality of ISI battalions making final preparations before assault.
        The researcher stumbled towards the war room. The researcher’s heart started to beat wildly. The armored suit issued a warning. All the thoughts. The enemy. the enemy closing all around. Dana, Ethar, Draston, Saris. Inter Systems Initiative. Enemy. Closing. In.


        The researcher collapsed in the hallway, tumbling loudly in the armorers suit, several times larger than the researcher. The reality was setting in. Setting in fast. Whatever daze the researcher had been was gone. Every vibration in the ground. Every thud above. It was all just signs of what waited in store. War was not the researcher’s business. The researcher had only the most fundamental of educations in tactics. Only combat experience consisted of being utterly helpless and surrounded by carnage.


        But the datacore in the suit was what mattered. The researcher did not need to have combat experience. The researcher just needed to be smart and fast. Fast enough to get out of the grips of the ISI.


Sirens throughout the station activated. The ISI had begun their assault. The die was cast.


***


        ISI and Alpha Empire artillery had exchanged blows almost constantly since the ISI had entrenched itself around the city of Lazarus. The massive static artillery pieces of the Alpha Empire had a range of two hundred kilometers. This meant that the forward operating bases of the ISI were set up right outside that ring. The ISI continued by deploying artillery walkers which had a maximum range of one hundred kilometers. They took fairly high casualties getting in range, but the constant day and night bombardment of Lazarus exacted a heavy toll on the city. The once proud and tall golden buildings of the city were now interwoven with smoke. Military damage done on the city was negligible. However, it did signal to the civilians of the city that war was coming. Rather than having an adverse effect, the citizens of Lazarus proudly strode to local armories and turned in their vacuum suits for unpowered militia armor and weapons. Few knew of the importance of what the researcher carried. They fought instead for the ideals of their honorable empire. For the bright future of the human race. For their great city.
        But now, the ISI bombardment grew fierce. The artillery walkers all began firing on the city and soon high explosive shells tore into the city’s various districts. The core of the city, housing its most important structures lay nestled safely out of range of the walkers. But the other districts surrounding the core had bright explosions tearing into them. The tallest of Lazarus’s buildings crumbled. Streets were torn and replaced by giant craters. Several buildings which took a direct impact were turned into smoldering heaps. The only bright side of the ISI ordinance was the few wounded it left behind. The shells exploded with such force and heat that they immediately killed anyone within their burst radius. The few wounded were mostly from the collapse of once beautiful buildings. 
        An Alpha Empire artillery platform got hit by a shell and exploded violently as the entire turret flew off and smashed through a neighboring building. The Alpha Empire had the luxury of longer range artillery positions. These platforms stood high above the skyline for the best firing angles and had done remarkably well against the ISI walkers thus far. But ammunition was becoming a real concern and the priority was now to thin out the attacking force, not its artillery. So even with black smoke rising from the destroyed artillery platform, the other  eighteen crews nervously waited and did not fire on the ISI artillery walkers.
        The ISI continued their bombardment for several minutes. The intent was obvious and dated back to as long as artillery existed. To suppress the enemy while moving the attacking forces in position. And this exactly what the ISI forces did. Dropships, gunships and other transports flew as close as they dared to Lazarus. Some went as far as twenty kilometers from the city limits. Lazarus had ring after ring of anti air ready, creating a large no fly zone above it. So the ISI transports disgorged their troops as close as they could to limit their time in the open. The surrounding terrain was all steppe. Little more but grasses and dust with absolutely no cover for an advance.
        Platoon after platoon of infantry, mechs and tanks came out of transports. As soon as any platoon touched down, its members rushed out of their transport and moved towards Lazarus at full speed. Transports touched down all along the city. Major clusters formed around the west, northeast and southeast. These would mark where the enemy intended to push into the city the fastest. It was not long before the steppe swarmed with the blue markings of ISI units. Tanks, both medium and heavy rolled towards their targets. Infantry teams sprinted in their bulky armor, using jet packs to launch themselves in the air for brief periods of time and keep up with the fast ISI armor.
        General purpose, heavy, rocket, sniper, tactical and assault mechs all sprinted towards the enemy. Out in the open they would fall easy prey to tanks with their tall, exposed forms, but when they got into the city they would wreak absolute havoc. Soon the transports stopped coming. The ISI had deployed all its available forces and they trudged into the outskirts of the capital.
        
        But the patience of the Alpha Empire artillery was about to be rewarded. The ISI forces were out in the open and still outside the city. This was their ideal window of opportunity. And they seized it.
        The artillery platforms unloaded shell after shell in rapid succession at preconfigured coordinates. The fast autoloading allowed new shells to load within ten seconds. It took a few moments before the first shells of the salvo detonated. But when they did, the ground shook far more than when the ISI walkers fired.


        The ultra violent detonations of the Alpha Empire shells sent shockwaves out for kilometers around. Vast chunks of ground were thrown in the air. Infantry were knocked off their feet by the force of the explosions. Huge craters were instantly formed all around and throughout the advancing ISI force. Infantry who were unlucky enough to get caught in these explosions were instantly torn into bloody, armored pieces. Tanks either disintegrated directly or were overturned by the sheer power of the artillery. Two, three and four legged mechs fell on the ground as mechanical legs were blown away. Some mechs were blown apart just like the infantry, in unrecognizable chunks. A few mechs, piloted by drones, were so affected by the shock waves of the artillery that the core computers ran into runtime errors. At least one human pilot had both the ears and lungs pop and slumped lifelessly in his pilot chair, the now pilotless mech crashing headfirst into the dirt. 
        But the ISI forces continued their advance. Many carrying injuries or damage of some kind, but many more completely unfazed by the artillery. They simply covered too much land for artillery to take out more than a handful of units. Not only that, but all the infantry, mechs and tanks were tactically spread out to avoid losses. The ISI walkers continued their barrage, and the artillery platforms responded in kind.
***
        The researcher experienced all of this from an underground bunker near Lazarus’s main spaceport to the east of the central district. Along with the researcher were dozens of infantry, mainly drones. Among the large bulky bodies of the infantry were the unpowered milita. They had all been trained to use their weapons accurately and effectively. Their armor was fairly weak and they were never trained to think tactically. But their moral was high and even though these were normal citizens, they were ready to patriotically defend their homes... to the last.
The distinct whistle of Alpha Empire missile batteries came from outside. This meant that ISI forces were inside city limits. The sniper teams and mines in those areas should give enough time for the defenders of the inner city to assume positions. In silence, every soul in the bunker rushed out through the entrance and into the daylight outside.
 
Commander Yvan had confirmation that a small Alpha Empire fleet, cobbled together from the surrounding star systems, was approaching to reinforce Belusia. It was far too small to defeat the ISI forces in orbit, but large and fast enough to punch through ISI defenses in orbit and extract the researcher. At least that was the plan. It depended on the fleet arriving in time, defeating enemy forces above Lazarus, and to stop the ISI from shooting down any transport attempting to rejoin with the fleet.
It seemed like the best, and only plan for getting the researcher off world and so there was no choice but to follow it. The researcher continued out the bunker entrance, following a single armored infantry amidst all the others who was directly watching over the researcher’s safety. 
Outside the bunker the researcher saw the twisted mockery of what had been the surrounding neighborhoods. Belusia was a relatively new colony, less than seventy years old. Its cities were old enough to look elegant and intimidating, but not yet old enough to justify the supermassive skyscrapers that the older cities had. In Lazarus, aside from the Command Center ziggurat, no structure stood above forty stories. All the buildings were constructed of golden bricks, created from and gaining their color from the sands of the steppe itself. The streets, used for pedestrian use only, were composed of similarly colored smooth stones. This gave the city a very unique look compared to the cities of other worlds. 


But that unique look was gone. What buildings that didn’t have holes were covered in black ash. Piles of once golden bricks lay everywhere. The streets were lined with craters and unrecognizable as the once peaceful walkways they once were. The sky was dark with the smoke from the city. Artillery kept exploding here and there from ISI walkers but for the most part the city lay in waiting. Militia and heavy weapons teams ran into positions. Tanks came out of shelter. 
The researcher followed the infantry escort, by the name of Private Wilkins, to the top of a small tower. It overlooked a few neighboring blocks of the city and the spaceport. Wilkins had given explicit orders to the researcher to conceal their presence. They were to wait until the signal was given from the fleet above. Immediately after, the researcher was to use the suit’s jump jet to make it inside the spaceport and use any remaining spacecraft that were left functioning to link up with the fleet. Any single craft could be damaged in the upcoming fight, so it was decided for the researcher to wait until just the ideal moment before launching.


The researcher used the infantry suit to zoom in on the fringes of the city. ISI tanks, mechs and infantry were all around, swarming inside.


The researcher took a deep breath and closed both eyes inside the suit. All that was left was the wait. Wait until the reinforcement fleet could rescue the researcher or wait for oblivion at the hands of the ISI. Only fate could tell which happened first.




Chapter 5: Departure


        The second floor of a data building exploded as a tank fired into it. Wounded Lazarus militia members inside began to claw their way out as the building collapsed right on top of them. The street held several Alpha Empire infantry doing their best to fend off another wave ISI forces. The dead lay strewn all around, blasted to pieces by the vicious gunfire coming from every direction. Three ISI heavy tanks were rolling across the street side by side, crunching rubble, machinery and bodies alike underfoot. All three tanks spat supersonic machine gun rounds from multiple guns all around. The main turrets swiveled as fast as they could, tracking the militia and infantry in and around the street. ISI infantry were tactically advancing alongside the tanks using cover and suppression fire. 
        From the rooftops, a militia fireteam used a handheld missile launcher and fired straight at one of the tanks. The missile impacted but did not penetrate. The tank began rotating its turret and its machine gun began ripping the building to shreds. Alpha Empire heavy infantry took this moment to open fire with heavy machine guns and missiles from the front, transforming the area around the tanks into a killzone. Unsuspecting ISI infantry were caught in the murderous barrage and had their armor penetrated multiple times before going down. The tanks took a beating and were immobilized with their front armor threatening to fail. Alpha Empire light infantry swooped in from above with jet thrusters and landed on the tops of each tank lightning fast, killing any nearby ISI infantry with compact submachine guns and strapping explosives onto the tanks. They then used their thruster packs to hop off the tanks and into the ruins of nearby buildings before each tank exploded. One was thrown onto its side by the ferocity of the explosions and  another had its turret blow off and fly high into the air.
        In the neighboring street, militia had surrounded a group of ISI infantry in a city square housing what was once an Alpha Empire statue. The ISI had spread out far too quickly and overextended, even though the ISI infantry were more heavily armored than the militia, the crossfire from all sides was rapidly chewing through their armor and less than a dozen were left out of a platoon of thirty. Soldier after soldier dropped dead, dozens of armor piercing rounds embedded in them. The Lazarus militia pressed on, Alpha Empire infantry forming up right behind them to finish off the ISI platoon. Suddenly five ISI mechs appeared. Three light mechs climbed onto buildings and began unleashing hell on the Alpha Empire forces in the square with their ferocious chainguns. Two tactical mechs strode in between wrecks on their four legs and opened fire with their cannons. Three Alpha Empire gunships presented themselves right over the rooftops and opened fire with rapid fire nose mounted cannons. The ISI light mechs standing on buildings scampered away but were too slow. They fell onto the ground as mangled wrecks. The tactical mechs on the ground took aim of the Alpha Empire gunships but they were never meant for anti air duty. Their slow to reload shots missed and the Alpha Empire gunships tore them apart with missiles before flying away to support a different district. 
        Lazarus spaceport itself was being torn apart. Alpha Empire tanks were exchanging fire with ISI heavy mechs. Missiles and supersonic tank shells weaved through the air, leaving misty missile trails and lightning speed flashes of blue tracer shells. An ISI heavy mech took a central hit from a tank and flew back, its pilot dead. Another mech got hit by a glancing round and wildly fired several missiles at the direction of Alpha tanks. None of the tanks got hit but bright blossoming explosions swirled all around them and several parked space shuttles were wrecked. Another ISI heavy mech took a hit, one if its stubby missile arms got sheared off. It balanced itself for a moment before leading the rest of the heavy mechs in retreat.


        All around the researcher ISI forces began a tactical retreat. Mechs picked up full speed and weaved between wreckage quickly. Infantry sprinted but kept their upper body down as they did so. The little tower the researcher perched in provided an excellent view of the surrounding area. What had been housing buildings, repair shops, hydroponics facilities and research labs were now barely standing structures with multiple holes on every side. Militia forces were crucial in helping keep control of the area with their numbers, but their casualties were catastrophic. A triage center had been set up less than a few blocks away. The wounded were everywhere, some being told that they would have to keep fighting without an arm or a leg since their injuries weren’t severe enough. Many were starting to fall into a state of shock and some militia members just laid against a wall staring into the distance. It was impossible to tell just by looking at their suited bodies if they were dead or alive.
The researcher tried not to look at the surrounding combat too much. Partially to avoid being spotted and partially to avoid looking at the vicious carnage. The urban combat had been fierce. The ISI forces had tried to divide Alpha Empire forces into little, manageable pieces that their tactical reserves could handle. They seemed invested in rushing into the center of the city and taking out its command center.
The strategy had failed, and three waves later the ISI was still being staved off. But the other districts were not doing quite so well. They were allocated less defending forces than the spaceport and were under imminent threat of being overrun. The spaceport itself was about to fall victim to the northeastern and southeastern armies. They were encircling the spaceport, getting ready to cut it off and wipe out the defenders. The only advantages the Alpha Empire had left was its air superiority above the city and its militia. But both were rapidly dwindling and the militia forces were either falling to shock or about to lay down their arms. Morale was running dangerously low. So were soldiers, ammunition, aircraft and especially time.


The researcher sat back in the tower and let out a long painful sigh. The ISI were almost finished regrouping for their final push.


***


The Alpha Empire fleet that the researcher was depending on began closing in on Belusia. It was composed of any and all warships the nearby remaining Alpha Empire systems had. The ISI fleet began to form up in defensive formation. 
The Alpha fleet only had two frigates, three destroyers and a single cruiser against the three cruisers of the Initiative and many destroyers and frigates. Even still, it represented the last hope of the Alpha Empire getting the researcher and the accompanying Project Enigma research back to Alpha Prime. The worlds that these ships came from were left defenseless in space. This rendered many soldiers on the Alpha vessels disenfranchised and extremely hesitant about leaving their home planets.
But if the Alpha Empire had one thing, it was loyalty. And that loyalty superseded all other loyalties, including loyalty to one’s home planet.


The Alpha fleet had several hundred crew members, each comfortably nestled inside their combat stations on a ship devoid of artificial gravity. Artificial gravity was difficult to create and pointless when in combat. Conflicts from centuries ago had long determined how vulnerable a ship was once its artificial gravity was disabled. Crew would drift and everything not immediately strapped down would majorly impede progress. Civilian vessels did have their own gravity, but this gravity was created by spinning the ship and utilizing the acceleration of the spin as gravity. True artificial gravity existed, in terms of a ship not spinning and the occupants still feeling its effects. This process artificially increased the density of sections of the ship and was both expensive and impractical and reserved for only very specific ships.
Why was a ship’s gravity so important? Besides being a major weakness, gravity also proved vital for human survival. Without it, bone and muscle loss resulted extremely quickly. More insidious effects would follow after a few years, mainly pertaining to the eyes and inner ears. Humans were not meant for space travel and no one was blind to this fact. The Alpha Empire had devised a working solution, one intended to keep the Empire together while preparing for transcending humanity into a spacefaring, conquering race.
So the Alpha Empire fleets had controllers linked directly to the ship’s interface and suspended in a jelly mixture with the exact density of a human being. A breathing apparatus of similar makeup also snaked into the lungs of the crew, filling them with air. The controllers lay naked, completely encased in this jelly and sustained by it. There were no crew quarters and no bridge. Pilots of smaller fighter craft were also encased in the same mixture. Their fighters lay docked on the underbelly of nimble destroyers or the two small hangars of the larger cruisers. Frigates also had a singular docking bay for gunships and dropships, intended solely for planetary combat.
When traveling the vast depths of space, crews of ships would run “game” simulations. Gunners would practice shooting targets, navigators would practice guiding the ship past dangerous obstacles and fighter pilots would simulate flying within their own starfighters. Other than that, the crew slept, especially through the journeys between planets.


But the crews of both the Alpha fleet and the Initiative fleet were wide awake now. The Alpha crew wiggled around in their containers, settling pre battle jitters. The jelly they lay in was very comforting and enveloping. They spent most of their lives in it and would feel right at home during battle. Battle that was very soon to come.


***


The infantryman guarding the researcher, Private Wilkins, sent a message.


Alpha Fleet almost in position. Prepare to access shuttles. Three usable craft still ready for launch. 


The ISI had begun their final offensive. They began with the most tremendous bombardment thus far, their walkers deployed at the city limits instead of many kilometers out. Lazarus City Command Center was targeted and stood proudly, but heavily beat. The upper floors containing civilian administration had all been wiped out and smoke rose from the top of the ziggurat. But the lower military floors were still very much intact and continuing to lead the holding action at Lazarus. 
The ISI was no longer shy about using its aircraft. Much of Lazarus’s anti air batteries had been disabled and their were not enough heavy mechs left to keep a no fly zone going. This gave a window of opportunity to the ISI and they grabbed it, making great use of their gunships to support the advances of ground troops.
The researcher watched grimly as explosions once again rocked the city and an entire column of ISI tanks tread through the ruined city streets. The northeastern and southeastern ISI elements were about to link up right in Lazarus spaceport. Only a defending squad of tanks was left. Everyone else was dead at the spaceport. 
Around the researcher only armored Alpha Empire infantry remained, militia forces had all pulled back. A light mech also remained, a drone whose commander was killed in the opening barrage.
The Alpha Empire defense veered on the brink of defeat but they only needed to wait until the Alpha Empire fleet got into position and could extract the researcher.


All for one data capsule that lay lodged securely on the researcher’s back. The researcher could not reach back to feel if it was there like the researcher could with a  vacuum suit. Instead, by accessing the diagnostics of the armored infantry suit being worn, the researcher managed to confirm the data capsule was still attached and functioning.


But something else happened too.


The infantry suit automatically synced up with the data in the data capsule, it falsely recognized it as a software upgrade. Thousands of logic lines began flashing in front of the researcher. Packets of data were unpacked and installed. Communication data disbursed.


The researcher stared in horror as all the software information disappeared and a single message that automatically opened. 


Installation successful.


Nothing happened. At least nothing immediately happened. Private Wilkins sat at the opposite edge of the small tower, observing aircraft duel in the sky and ground forces making their way closer. He was completely oblivious to anything the researcher may have done. The researcher was not an expert of suit software or even exactly how the data was encoded on the data capsule. The former crew members of the researcher, Ethar and Draston, were experts. The researcher winced, realizing how much better it would have been if one of them had taken the data capsule and left Phoenix Station instead of the researcher. But leadership means responsibility, and the researcher accepted the responsibility. This was not the time to shirk away from it. The researcher’s eyes widened instantly.


In the researcher’s infantry suit, a little video image appeared. It was a man, slightly balding with some sweat running down his forehead. He opened his mouth and said, “third squad hold position, first, second, fourth squads move up. Watch your spacing and keep control of the rooftops. We’ve lost a lot of good soldiers up here.”

The man’s face disappeared and was replaced by the video of three different people.


A woman, with purple bangs and purple lips.
Another woman, with short hair kept in a bun.
A man, with hair on the top of his head but not on the sides.
A third woman, large scar running across her right eye and no hair.


They all responded saying, “affirmative.”


The researcher flinched at the last word. The only person the researcher had seen as of recent was Commander Athelia when she had directed troops without her helmet on Phoenix Station. Even she was incredibly pale and hairless. Everyone else was in their vacuum suits. That was just how the Alpha Empire worked. People did not see each others faces. People were weaker without them.


A different person, a woman with thick curly hair and piercing green eyes, appeared in front of the researcher.


“Check up to the right, cover that doorway. Keep eyes peeled on the rooftops. Do not let the Alpha rabble catch you off guard.”


A man appeared, young and with long blue hair.


“Copy that, sending drones three and four. If there is any Alpha infantry, they will take care of them.”


The researcher could not believe it. The infantry suit had successfully assimilated the data core and factored in nearby squad level communication. But the people were so shocking, so different. None of them were as pale as the researcher or any other Alpha Empire people. They had skin hues from lightly tanned to very dark. Not only did they have hair, but it was in so many wild colors. These people were so different. Not only that, but they used visual communication. What was the point of that? You only need to hear an order to understand it.


“Jump!” Private Wilkins cried out. The researcher took one full second to realize what was happening and haphazardly jumped out of the tower. A split second later a missile impacted into it, roaring in the researcher’s ears and causing the shock wave to throw the researcher even further through the air. The researcher tried to activate the suit’s jump pack. The thruster sprung into action and lifted the researcher but in the wrong direction, slamming the researcher’s armored bulk through a building wall. The researcher quickly stood up, largely unfazed thanks to the suit’s substantial armor. Between the missile explosion and jump out of the tower, the researcher was glad to be wearing armor instead of a vacuum suit. The latter would have resulted in instant death.


A message appeared.


ISI have breached spaceport. Follow me to secondary launch site.


The researcher shook both arms, grabbed a dropped penetrator rifle, and followed Private Wilkins. There was a smaller, two shuttle launch facility further away, but it was now the researcher’s only hope of getting off the planet. Unfortunately, the path to it weaved in and out of the front line. 


We are going to need to use our jump packs extensively to get there. Remember your instruction on how to use them. 


***
        The Alpha Empire fleet was finally within attack range, its single cruiser sped ahead on a trajectory that would see it pass the ISI fleet and enter orbit right above Belusia. The remaining destroyers and frigates stayed further behind and began firing. 
        Space combat usually took place at extreme range and would see both sides jockeying for tactical supremacy and arranging ships and fighters in strategically beneficial positions. The vast distances of space allowed this to happen and thus most battles were executed with skill and precision, unlike surface battles that developed quickly and ferociously.
        But the ISI mistook the purpose of the Alpha Empire fleet. They believed it was coming to retake the planet. Even though the fleet was less than half the ISI fleet’s size, the Initiative believed the Alpha Empire fleet intended to fight a thoroughly tactical battle. It was not prepared then, when the ships of the Alpha Empire fleet approached at maximum acceleration and simultaneously opened fire with railguns, cluster missiles and several plasma torpedoes. The railguns and cluster missiles were headed straight for ISI destroyers to give them something to deal with. But the biggest threat came from the ISI cruisers. Large craft capable of tremendous damage. For them, the Alpha Empire destroyers opened fire with plasma torpedoes, relatively slow (but still traveling at several kilometers per second), the torpedoes were just ultra hot streams of plasma that could not be guided once shot, but also could not be shot down. Anything that might have attempted to shoot down plasma, be it autocannons or lasers, would achieve nothing.
        The green balls of plasma hurtled towards their targets, trailing behind missile trails. The railguns the Alpha Empire destroyers fired had all missed, but they reloaded quickly and let loose another volley. Conservation of ammunition was not an objective. Punching a hole through the ISI fleet was the objective. The only objective.
        The Alpha Empire cruiser continued forward, skirting the periphery of the ISI fleet. The three ISI cruisers and four destroyers were still grouped together, but the rest of their fleet, composed of frigates, was scattered all over the planet supporting the assault. This left their fleet smaller and more vulnerable, letting the Alpha destroyers and frigates tie up the ISI cruisers and destroyers and giving the Alpha cruiser a chance to slip past.
        A single ISI frigate orbited directly above the city of Lazarus. It continually deployed dropships and supplies to reinforce ground forces below. The Alpha cruiser that was approaching Lazarus deployed all of its fighters and fired its deadly railguns at the ISI frigate. The frigate was so unprepared, and outgunned, that it had very little it could do. A single rod from a railgun tore through the ship entirely, causing small explosions and debris to begin streaming out. Alpha starfighters closed in and strafed the dying ship with explosive rounds, tearing into the decks and leaving the ship to twist apart in orbit. As it began its slow, eventual trek into the planet’s atmosphere, the Alpha Empire cruiser sent out an encrypted message to the surface.


***
        The researcher desperately tried to keep up behind Private Wilkins who expertly sprinted across the battlegrounds. Random pieces of debris and piles of bricks made the researcher consider every step carefully, but Private Wilkins seemed to almost dance across the battlefield, knowing the exact capabilities of the armored suit as if it was the private’s own body. Intense street by street fighting was going on all around them, the researcher had to dart between lines of tracer fire and under advancing mechs. Aircraft battled in the sky, fully pitted against each other with minimal support from the surface. They zipped in and out of view, missile trails crisscrossing through the sky. 
        
        Alpha fleet in position. Make your approach now. Cannot hold current position for long. 


        The secondary launch facility was not much further out, but the city was lost. Alpha Empire forces were in full retreat to the city center, and even there, some lead ISI elements were laying siege to the ziggurat. Private Wilkins slowed pace once they reached an alley between buildings and ordered the researcher to get down. ISI infantry and tank columns were advancing in the street ahead. A flaming Alpha Empire gunship crashed up ahead, shaking the ground. But in the vicinity, it became unnaturally quiet. The rapid popping noises of distant gunfire continued to echo through the air, and distant thumps also continued to vibrate through the ground, but, the researcher could only hear the hydraulic lifting of mech feet and the crunching of tank threads nearby. They were utterly surrounded by the ISI.


        Situation critical. ISI forces regrouping. Orbit can be held for only a few more minutes.


        The researcher knew that Private Wilkins was also getting the messages. The researcher waited for him to make a move. A decision. How to get to the launch facility. He sprang into action. He jumped on a nearby wall and pushed off using his jump pack to reach the top of the building. The researcher activated the jump pack and flew up, relying on Private Wilkins’ hand to help grab a ledge and get on top of the building. Nearby ISI forces had noticed the commotion.
        “What was that? Came from the right.”
        
        “Dustin, Kelly, Amanda, check it out.”


        “That was an Alpha jump pack.”


        “Sounded like it. Where are they now?”


        The researcher quickly sent Wilkins a message.


        They know we are here.


        Wilkins sprinted and jumped across the street and ISI troops using a thruster pack. The researcher followed and cringed mid air as supersonic rounds began to slice through the air. Both of them continued sprinting on what rooftops were not destroyed and jumped between buildings. ISI infantry began to close in behind them. The researcher and Wilkins reached the launch facility and thankfully found one remaining shuttle still docked. 


“Get in!” Wilkins yelled and jumped onto a platform above with launch controls.


The researcher clambered into the shuttle and sat in one of the seats. It molded to the researcher’s form and encased the armored suit entirely, providing a strong hold. Through the shuttle’s sensors the researcher saw a half dozen ISI troops appear in front of the shuttle. The shuttle’s ignition sequence was beginning. It would be another thirty seconds until liftoff.
        
        A woman with long purple hair and eyebrows, and very strange piercings in her ears appeared on the researcher’s screen.


        “Hold your fire. Intel says this may be our high priority target.”


        A man, no hair and dark skin appeared and responded, “high priority target was spotted wearing a vacuum suit. How do we ID?”


        The woman appeared on the screen again and opened her mouth to speak but a shot went straight through her and encased her suit’s camera with blood. The researcher recoiled at this sight and was thankful when the video feed cut off.


        More rounds were fired from up above by Private Wilkins. Another ISI infantryman went down, but there were fifteen seconds left until the launch sequence completed.


        “The shuttle is launching! Disable it!” one of them yelled.


        Private Wilkins must have guessed their intentions when they turned to fire on the shuttle supports. He flung himself over the platform and landed boots first on an ISI infantry suit, slamming it into the ground. Private Wilkins then opened fire point blank on a neighboring infantry, armor piercing shots ripping through the armor. But the two remaining ISI infantry both turned and opened fire on Wilkins from opposite sides. His body flailed as the rounds tore into it from both directions and he fell to his knees, already dead, before falling backwards into his own blood. The shuttle launched a moment later and the two remaining ISI infantry had but a mere moment to realize what was happening before they burned alive inside their suits.


        The researcher looked out the viewport to the rapidly shrinking city of Lazarus. Pockets of resistance still waged isolated battles but the city was undoubtedly conquered. An entire squadron of enemy gunships hovered in front of Lazarus City Command Center and unleashed volleys of missiles into its supports, leaving the ziggurat to crumble in a massive cloud of smoke. The city became smaller and smaller, becoming but a spire of smoke and flame. Hundreds of bodies lay in those ruins. Thousands of lives had been extinguished. The researcher looked away, a single tear resting on the researcher’s cheek.


        The war had come to Belusia. Only the researcher had left it.




Chapter 6: Awakening


The researcher lay still in a hangar bay. Nothing stirred. The only sound came from the soft, resonating hum of the Alpha Empire cruiser’s engines. Crates of supplies, mostly empty, lay stacked. Similarly empty gun racks and armories lined the walls. All the troops that had called this hangar bay home were fighting on some planet or already dead. 
The silence made the researcher feel nauseously alone. Besides the researcher’s quarters aboard Phoenix Station, there were no moments where the researcher was alone. Always, others walked along hallways or worked alongside the researcher. Even on Lazarus the city was filled with people. Grim, determined and distant, but still filled with people. 
The researcher leaned against a wall, sitting motionlessly. Listening to the hum of the engines. Taking in the lack of people. Everyone else on the ship was lying still in their jelly filled cocoons above the researcher, directing the ship for departure. The cruiser was the only ship left of the Alpha Empire’s makeshift extraction fleet, the rest had been destroyed valiantly fighting the ISI above Belusia. 
It was hard to believe that Belusia was gone. Everyone on it was most likely dead or soon to be dead the researcher mused sardonically. There could be no one on the cruiser and the researcher would not notice. The researcher was utterly alone. Only the hum of the ship’s engine served as a reminder that death had not yet taken the researcher.
Soon, the researcher would have to go into cryosleep before the ship was enveloped in a stasis field and exited the system, traveling to another one. The researcher was fairly high level in terms of information access and had read about cryosleep. There were no dreams. No brain activity. No nothing. If one slight calculation was off, the sleeper would never awake. Maybe that would mark the end of the researcher? Laying down in a stasis tube being the last living moments before never becoming awake again? Then everyone from Belusia would truly be dead, and the planet would be wiped from existence. The very thought of that struck great pain in the researcher. Not only had all the tragedies happened on Belusia, but for no one to remember them? To forget all the people that lived and worked there. To forget the station that continued to carry out history defining research? To forget the thousands who no longer lived. An inconceivable tragedy. Inconceivable because it would have meant that the past week’s, no, the past month’s events were meaningless. But was that even far back enough? That would mean Belusia and all its inhabitants were meaningless for… forever. If the data capsule never made it back to the Alpha Empire, no one would care to remember any of that entire planet. The incoming Alpha Empire fleet had already confirmed that the ISI had intercepted all drones heading out from Belusia. That meant any information the researcher had sent about Project Enigma never made it out of the system. The data capsule was truly the researcher’s last hope.
        Suddenly another subconscious thought resonated and climbed into the researcher’s conscious thoughts. The algorithms of Project Enigma had worked. The armored suit the researcher wore had successfully integrated and decrypted enemy transmissions. But these enemies, the ISI, they were nothing like expected. The researcher had expected to hear voices or even just text commands exchanged between troops and drones. But instead the researcher saw video. Video feeds of the ISI troops talking. Video feed of their faces. Video feed of that one woman who died on screen at the hands of Private Wilkins. But, all of the ISI the researcher had seen, the men and women, looked so, different. So vibrant. Their skins were all different shades and their bodies so colorful. A lot of them had hair, most dyed in a flashy color. Some of them had metal items pierced through their ears. One had a slightly larger metal item through the nose. Their lips were all sorts of different colors and some of their eyes even had artificial shading beneath. They just looked so interesting. So different. The researcher could never have imagined the ISI looking as they did. There was just the assumption that they were the same as the Alpha Empire. But they were nothing the same. Even the way they talked. The strange inflections in voice. Everything. Everything was so different about them.There was something about them that just made them seem so energetic. So full of life. It seemed that they had thoughts besides their duties. 
Inefficiency. That is what they were. Inefficient. Wasting resources and time to decorate their bodies. Using video communication. Why? A simple message in text would do just as well with less distraction.
        The researcher decided to stand up, hearing the pistons of the armored suit once again hissing quietly. The researcher walked over to one of the many armories on the walls of the cruiser and initiated the suit mechanism. Automated robotic arms disengaged the suit and took it off in several pieces. A second later the researcher was outside the armored suit wearing nothing. Only in the stasis tubes was the researcher ever naked. Anywhere else the researcher felt overly exposed and weak. The human body was marvelous but outdated, it could not evolve as fast as humanity’s capabilities. 
        But as the researcher stood naked, alone in the hull of the starship, the researcher felt a need. After seeing those ISI members and what they looked like…
        The researcher walked over to a wall console and keyed in a command to make the wall reflective, forming a flawless mirror.


        The researcher approached the mirror, and for the first time, she looked at herself.


        Her face was one she scarcely recognized. Every once in a while she would see it reflecting briefly off some surface in her quarters. Her features were warped then and she never paid attention to them. No one saw her face. It was always kept protected inside the vacuum suit, why should she need to see her own face? Besides Commander Athelia on Phoenix Station, she hadn’t seen a single human face in several years. Until now, that had never bothered her.


        She looked deeply into her own eyes. They were green. She never really paid attention to her own eye color. It was never important. Her face was incredibly pale, contrasting sharply against her eyes and not too different from the snow of Belusia’s northern regions. Being so long in a suit, and after several generations of being bred that way, there was no need for any sort of skin coloration.
        She bent forward a little and ran a hand against the top of her head. Smooth and utterly hairless. If not for some gene research she had done a couple of years ago, she would have never even guessed humans had hair. And these ISI soldiers embraced it. They had changed their hair to curl in all sorts of different ways, some straight, some tied in bunches, some chose not to have any hair she assumed. But she didn’t choose anything. It was common knowledge in the Alpha Empire that this was how everyone looked. Completely devoid of hair, pale and thin. Everything was handled by the suits they wore and the technology they wielded. There was no more need to rely on the human body.
        The researcher stood there and touched her fingertips to her shoulder and squeezed it. It felt so odd to feel something other than the suits they wore. She wondered briefly if the citizens of the ISI touched each other skin to skin? 
        She took her hand and touched her face with it. It felt so unbelievably strange. But it was comforting somehow. Even though she stood in the hangar of the cruiser, the vast void of space only a single bulkhead away, and the coldness of the ship permeating through the air, she felt comfortable. She could never even begin to fathom how she felt comfortable without her suit. Exposed. Visible. Weak. That’s what she usually felt like.


        Touching her own face and body with her bare hands just felt reassuring somehow. It was a very new feeling. But it was wrong. Unnatural. She was purposely relying on something as weak as a human touch. This made her weak. It made her like the ISI. Inefficient and pointless.


She stared at her reflection again, but instead of looking at the features of her body, she stared right into her own eyes. And her eyes were filled with hatred. She felt tears forming. Another weak and inefficient aspect of her body. 
She curled a hand into a fist and slammed the mirror with it. It was in reflective mode but still composed of the same alloy forming the rest of the ship making it super hard. The researcher did not care. She started slamming both fists into her own reflection.


“WEAK!” she cried out.


“TRAITOR!” she yelled.


“INEFFICIENT!” she screamed as loud as she could.


“Do you hear me?” she yelled all around her, “I am worthless! I have failed the Alpha Empire! I deserve none of this responsibility! I am nothing but human and will never reached enlightenment!”


She stopped attacking her own reflection and sank against the wall holding her bloodied fists close and sobbing. Belusia was gone. Its people dying. And all she did was compare herself to the murderers that killed them. She was a failure in every aspect. 


An automated warning message rang throughout the ship, telling the researcher to climb into the stasis pods. The researcher quickly climbed into one, thankful for something to do. Before lowering completely into it, the researcher took one last look at the rows upon rows upon rows of stasis pods. At least five hundred stasis pods lay between the cruiser’s two hangers. No doubt at some point they were all used. Now only the researcher lay inside one, looking at the hatch that closed above and mercifully put the researcher into a deep sleep.


This deep sleep would not be like the other deep sleeps the researcher had experienced. The moment the ship’s computer recognized the researcher as unconscious, it injected protectant chemicals into the bloodstream which were quickly distributed by the heart. Five minutes after, a special cryogenic fluid filled the tank and sealed the researcher. All cellular activity immediately stopped. The researcher was now completely unconscious and had zero brain activity.


        The sleep was required to ensure the ship’s crew would not die of old age before reaching its destination. The rest of the crew were already in a cryogenic state, their jelly pods were specially formulated to support cryogenic freezing. The entire ship drifted through space and quietly phased.
***


Chapter 7: Isolation


        The speed of light had yet to be broken. No matter the branch of physics, light was constant in vacuum. This meant travel between stars was horrendously slow. Once the people of Earth had colonized the solar system, they realized they wanted; needed to expand further out. Centuries of theoretical knowledge reached an apex known as “phasing”.
Barring the specifics, phasing caused a ship to enter a self containing time loop that caused the passage of time to speed up. This allowed for travel to different worlds in a timely fashion for the outside perspective. But for the perspective of the passengers, time was not sped up. It remained the same. This caused anything that entered a phase jump to take the same amount of time that it would take on a conventional journey. Studies of materials that were successfully phased showed how the materials aged dozens of years when it seemed like mere seconds for the viewers. Because of this, all crew had to be cryogenically frozen. If someone was not frozen, their crew would discover a pile of bones upon waking. And because the strange phase change, whatever state a person was in while the phase jump activates is the phase that person will stay in for the duration of the journey. So if someone is lightly sleeping, they will lightly sleep for hundreds of years. If this did not end in death (which it would), it would end in the person becoming insane once awakening. Living beings were not made for interstellar travel. The solution was to make them temporarily unliving. 
***
        For the starcruiser, almost a century passed. It cruised silently in phase mode, completely alone. Only certain particles naturally phased, and these were scarce, invisible with no actual effects. Everything else was just a void that extremely few people had seen. 
Starships were constructed meticulously, having to withstand the rigors of combat and time. Through the centuries, starship engineering had vastly improved and disastrous phase jumps were largely averted. But occasionally, a ship would enter phase having a small problem in the phase drive, or hull, or something of the nature. Upon leaving phase the ship would arrive as a mangled wreck. The crew torn by gravitic forces in their deep sleep, never noticing the change of state from sleep to death. Sometimes ships entering phase would never emerge. Where their crew and cargo emerged remained an eternal mystery. 
        For Belusia, it took three solar days between the ship entering phase, and leaving phase. Such were the realities of space. That is, there were no constant realities.


***


        The starcruiser’s computer registered the exit of phase and injected melting fluid into the researcher. It spread slowly through her body, freeing the heart and brain first, allowing the rest of the fluid to be disbursed by the body. The researcher’s cells slowly regained function and the researcher’s brain activity resumed. At first she was in a deep unconscious state. Not even dreaming. But she quickly awoke soon after. 
        The stasis chamber’s hatch slid open and the researcher instantly sat up, feeling the same exact colossal failure she felt when going to sleep. For the ship 121 years had passed. For her, less than a second.
        She tried to open her eyes but she couldn’t see anything yet. Some organs took longer to readjust after cryogenic sleep than others. She sniffled, still recovering from her sobbing when she had gone into the stasis chamber. 
She heard footsteps. The heavy suited kind. Next she felt two powerful armored hands grab her and take her out of the stasis chamber. Her vision slowly returned and she opened her eyes. She saw the top of the hangar moving. She was being dragged. She focused on the two armored forms next to her. It took some time for her eyes to adjust and focus on the shapes. But there was no doubting it.


She was being dragged by two ISI marines.
 
        The researcher lay curled up on the floor in a small cabin. It had white walls, white ceiling, white door, white chairs and a white bed. The room matched the researcher well, for it was just as white as she. The only thing that differed in color were her clothes. She wore a shirt and pants, made of some sort of lightweight fibers. Her clothes were cyan colored, just like the ISI flag.
        She remained in the corner, hugging her knees with her arms and constantly looked around the mostly featureless room. The walls provided the illumination, there were no lights. The door was sealed and had no distinguishing features except its edges where it met the wall. The two chairs were very plain, welded right into the floor.
        She reached out with a hand to feel the cool, glossy surface of the wall. She then took her hands and felt her face and her arms. She shook her head several times.
        It all still seemed very unreal. She entertained the possibility that she was still asleep aboard the Alpha Empire cruiser, safe in her stasis chamber. She was light years away from enemy hands. Most importantly, she was about to enter Alpha Prime orbit and reveal the secrets of the ISI and help win the war. Yes, she closed her eyes, that is where I am right now.


        But when her eyes opened the scenery remained the same. The dull white room with the two chairs and bed. The bed. She hadn’t seen an actual bed since her early childhood. The stasis chamber was a way of life for her. She vowed not to use the bed. It would make her weak and easy to exploit by the ISI. No. She would not let them do that to her. It was enough thate her vacuum suit was taken away and she had to wear these atrocious clothes.. They provided no protection at all. Pointless. Absolutely pointless. 
        She sighed. She had no qualms about what would happen to her. The ISI was well known for their torture. Their mental and physical twisting of captives. But she would remain resolute. She would reveal nothing. And if help did not arrive soon, she would find some way to kill herself. She had to. The Alpha Empire would expect nothing less of her. Maybe in this one way she could atone for all her failures.
        How could she have ever even thought to compare herself to those ISI faces she saw. They were murderers. Every last one of them. Heathens that seeked to do nothing but stall the human race’s progress towards salvation. She would do everything in her power to stop them from doing so. 


        All the walls around her dimmed slightly and the wall directly across from her turned into a visual display. In the image she saw darkness penetrated by a few faint dots of light. Space. And in the center of the image was the glorious Alpha Empire cruiser she was taken from. The crew were undoubtedly fully awake and functioning now and preparing to assault whatever ship she was on. She looked wistfully, convincing herself that this was what she wanted: for the cruiser to open fire and cleanse her of her mistakes. To cleanse her and burn out whatever other ISI were on her ship. She awaited eagerly, taking deep breaths and even beginning to form a trace of a smile.


        But death did not come. Did it forget? Did it miss? Or did it happen so abruptly she never noticed?
        She opened her eyes and looked at the cruiser. She was still alive. But whatever traces of a smile she had were instantly replaced by a contorted expression of pure horror. She watched as flames raced from the stern of the ship to the aft, viciously tearing it apart from the inside. Despair flooded her heart once more and she could no longer bear to hold herself up. She slumped back against the corner of the room. The display vanished and wall lights brightened once more. 
        She was truly alone now. Alone with nothing but the reality of the situation. This was it. They were going to kill her here after extracting every last piece of information from her. She vowed to give them nothing but what if the torture proved too severe? She had not been subject to torture before. Her mind was not conditioned to actively protect itself from mental probing. They could use any number of tactics against her for which she was totally unprepared. She had to kill herself now. Before they got to her.
        But how could she kill herself? There were no tools in the room. Was she to smash her head against the wall? That would merely knock her unconscious and make her that much more vulnerable to their impending questions. The chairs were equally useless, so sleek and curved that they had no suitable edges.
        She had to try. Had to. She would be failing the Alpha Empire again if she did not try to. Besides, death now was so much more preferable than death after whatever tortures the ISI could concoct. 


        But a strange feeling took hold of her. A pain. But this pain felt not like any other pain she felt before. It came from her belly and it felt more like a lacking than a pain. A strange feeling. Very strange. It slowly consumed her thoughts and soon her only desire was to satisfy this feeling. The feeling grew stronger and stronger until she mercifully escaped it in sleep.


***
        She awoke with a start. Everything was the same in the room. Everything but a single tray sticking out of a wall. She slowly approached it. The feeling she had felt earlier continued to dominate her thoughts and caused her belly to ache. On the tray were three… things. One red, one golden-grey, and one green. There was also a tool next to this tray. 
        She examined the tray cautiously. The things on it were all solid, but the green and golden ones were soft. The red thing was spherical, and looked a bit harder. She poked it and felt it bend a bit against her push. She began to have the strongest need to taste it. She fought the need. Not only did it seem illogical but also dangerous. She had no idea what it could do to her. She didn’t taste anything because nothing had to be tasted. Taste was an obsolete sense; the tongue merely a vestigial organ. 
        But it seemed to beckon her. It stemmed from the ever increasing intensity of the feeling she felt in her belly. For what seemed like hours she stared at the objects. She staved off her desires to taste them. But the longer she waited, the more powerful the urge became. She tried to focus on other things. The proud Alpha Empire. The evil ISI. Phoenix Station. Anything. 


        It proved too difficult. She had no idea how long she lasted. The lights on the walls did not change, nor did the rest of the room. Nothing changed. Only the objects stared back at her and she continued to gaze back, salivating. She hesitantly dabbed at the golden material with her smallest finger and watched some of it slip away onto her finger. The material was soft and moist. It made her recoil for a moment. But she brought it to her lips and licked her finger.


        And then she did the last thing she wanted to do: taste it.


        And it tasted marvelous. A beautiful symphony of tastes she never knew existed merged to form a delightful treat. She eagerly grabbed the rest of the golden material with her hands and swallowed all of it greedily. She caught herself relishing the taste and ingesting it ever so slowly as a result.
        She still felt wildly unsatisfied and began to eat the green material. Another flurry of tastes bombarded her, these were more savorful and intense than the golden material was. She had crossed the point of no return and felt so good. The intense feeling in her belly began subsiding but not fast enough for her to stop eyeing the last object. This spherical object did not separate like the other materials. She rotated it in her hand before deciding to take a big bite.
        As her incisors squeezed the object and penetrated its skin, water erupted from inside and splattered on her shirt. She held it away from her and analyzed it, noting its highly fluid, yet still solid interior.


        She continued biting it and enjoying the water and tastes that came from it. She enjoyed it so much so she scarcely noticed the door open behind her.


        But she did hear it slightly and turned around, only to flich in fear.


        A single man, dressed in fibrous clothing like she, was sitting in one of the chairs.


        He began speaking in a deep, calm voice. “Now, I know you may not have had a tomato or any other food in quite some time, but please do not make such a mess next time. And use the spoon we provided. It is just common courtesy for yourself at least.”


        Tomato.
        Food.
        Of course. She was utilizing the archaic method of obtaining nutrients indirectly from physical entities. She couldn’t believe they were subjecting her to this inefficient method of nutrient intake. It was insulting.
        
        The researcher stayed very still and observed the man. She contemplated the best way to attack this ISI enemy and dispatch him. Maybe using something he had she could escape or even kill herself? She had to act with no hesitation and catch him by complete surprise. She stealthily grabbed the food tool given to her as part of the meal. He turned around briefly and prepared to sit down(already sitting). This was the time to strike. She sprang up and took three steps. That was as far as she got.


        He quickly swept her off her feet and pushed her into the other chair which adhered to her skin, rendering her completely immobile.
        “Your lack of adequate nutrition and physical stimulation has left you very weak.” the man said rather nonchalantly. “I am more than capable of taking you down if you try this again. I hope in the future when we talk I won’t have to restrain you like this. Oh,” he looked down at the tool the researcher dropped, “that is not what a spoon is used for my dear.”


        The researcher said nothing and just glared in resentment.


        “Alright. I take that as your understanding of what I just said. Well, before I go I am required to ask, are you feeling okay?”
        
        She looked at him menacingly.


        “Do you find the food provided adequate?”


        She looked at him menacingly.


        “Are the sleeping accommodations satisfactory?”


        She looked at him menacingly.


        “I am required to ask but luckily I am not required to receive an answer. I will return again when you are in better health than you are now.”


        He quickly left the room and the chair adhering itself to the researcher suddenly lost all its attachment. The researcher stood and banged on the door several times. She then fell to her knees and stayed in that position for a very long time.
***
        “Hello again, I trust you are feeling better now?” the man said.


        The researcher sat in the chair across from him, calculating how to attack him again. She said nothing and continued to glare at him.


        “Your show of defiance here is really unnecessary. I would really like to engage in a mutually beneficial dialogue.”


        The researcher continued her glare. She had nothing left. Nothing except the time she had until she died. She would use it well. Whatever tortures were to come, whatever pains she had to endure, she would use the time left in this world ins service to the Alpha Empire.


        “Excuse me for interrupting your thoughts.” the man said, “but I want to address a few things.”


        “First and foremost, my name is Derick. I will be taking care of you until you are well.”


        He paused.


        “We are en route now to an ISI world. The path we are taking will almost certainly render us safe from any Alpha Empire attacks. You need not worry about experiencing  battle again. I understand it can be very traumatic.”


The researcher looked straight into Derick’s eyes unwaveringly. Derick blinked uncertainly.


“Just do it.” the researcher said quietly.


Derick’s eyebrow rose. “Do what exactly?”


“Just start the torture.” she said, her face as solemn as a statue. “The sooner you finish this charade, the sooner you can kill me and be done with it.”


Derick put his hands together and looked the researcher right in her eyes with a simultaneously understanding, yet ferocious look.


“There is one thing you should know.” he said in a suddenly low voice.“This is not an interrogation.” 


He paused for a moment and leaned in. “This is rehabilitation.”


The researcher could feel her body go numb and a shiver went up her spine. This was not going how it was supposed to be. Were these some sort of devious tactics? Rehabilitation? Were they going to turn her into one of them? No scenario existed in which this ended well for her.


Derick stood up and straightened his shirt.


“You start tomorrow.”


And left the room.


        The researcher finally gave in to sleep at some point. There was no way to keep time in her room. The lights dimmed when she closed her eyes and brightened when she opened them. The featureless white walls held no displays of any sort. The door to get into the room melded in perfectly with the wall. 
        It could have been hours, days or weeks. As of recent her sleep cycle was in tatters. Her emotions were either suppressed or overflowing. Fear and hopelessness were no strangers. More like companions at this point.
        
        Derick walked in, waking her from an anxious half sleep. She did not trust him or any ISI aligned person any more than the last time she saw him. As she rose, she watched him carefully. She observed his casual manner and neutral expression. It was impossible to glean what was forthcoming. 
        He gently placed another meal tray in front of her and knelt down in front of her on one knee.
        “Please eat this. Are you physically feeling alright?”


        The researcher continued to eye him warily, turning her head as she mused about Derick’s intentions. “I am fine.” she finally replied.


        “Okay. The first step of your rehabilitation begins today.” Derick began in a grave tone. “It will be… painful. Not for your body. But for the spirit.”


        “The spirit?” the researcher replied, discarding momentarily her icy tone in her confusion.


        “Be strong.” Derick said. “Not everyone gets through this.”


        He stood, looked at her one time with what the researcher unmistakably saw as worry. He sighed and walked out, the door sliding shut behind him. Either he genuinely cared, or he was so dedicated to his role aboard this ship that he gave a flawless performance. Somehow he made the researcher dread the waiting even more. 
She was hungry. A feeling that she was still not completely acquainted with. But the worry she felt and the beating of her heart made food the last thing on her mind. This is where they corrupt me. Where they destroy who I am and stuff one of them into me. 


***
































Chapter 8: Knowledge


The researcher began pulling on her hair with both hands as she waited. She walked around her room. She began to question her sanity. What if Derick did not exist? She was remotely familiar with cases of hallucinating under severe duress. 


Might she be dead? If this was all real, would she be dead soon?


        The door opened once more but Derick did not emerge. Instead a very tall and thin woman walked in. She had on a dark jumpsuit; nothing like the clothing the researcher and Derick wore. She wore some sort of artificial shadowing under her eyes and her eyes themselves seemed to be outlined in black. She had black hair and her lips painted dark. The rest of her skin was far tanner than the researcher but still, she stood out against her suit greatly.


        “I am Rehabilitator Eris.” she said in a cold whisper.


        The researcher just looked at the woman with her mouth open and no response.


        Eris looked at the researcher, eyed her up and down. The researcher could not bear to look into her eyes, and so she looked away. Still, she felt her eyes analyzing her. It felt as if ice water was being poured onto her. 


        “Sit down.” Eris said.


        The researcher swallowed nervously. This was the deciding moment. There was no choice but for her to obey Eris’s instructions. She was too weak to attack her. Too lost to resist her. So she obeyed and sat down.


        The chair once again adhered to her, making movement impossible. The researcher struggled against the urge to move. It would just unnerve her when she realized she couldn’t. The chair turned by itself to face Eris. The lights in the room dimmed. When the researcher looked at Eris, she appeared more like a shadow than a person.


        “I am about to tell you some truths.” she whispered once more, her voice ever so slightly disconcerting.


        “You cannot choose to deny these truths. It is impossible.”


        The researcher began to ready a protest.


        “But…” Eris continued, “you can choose how you react to these truths.”


        Instantly the room turned translucent. Eris, the furniture, the walls, everything disappeared. In a huge, loud rush the background changed from the void of space to dusty plains overlooking a city.


“What is this place?” the researcher whispered.


“You know.” Eris’s voice responded, sounding omniscient.


 “Belusia.” the researcher said blankly.


Suddenly, it appeared as if the researcher flew towards the city until she sat, confined in her chair, on top of a gold-bricked building looking down. In the distance were evergreen forests. Above the city was a clear bluish-green sky. She watched as birds flew around and citizens intermingled far below. Their conversations were not distinct enough to make out but undeniably pleasant. Some of them laughed. Some of them hugged. 
Not a single one wore vacuum suits. Instead, they all bore clothing of too many styles and too many colors. So many things were The researcher struggled to comprehend what she was looking at.


        “This. This is Lazarus City. But these are not its citizens!” the researcher blurted out.


        “This is Lazarus City, before it was Lazarus City. It was once known as Aroana City, the capital of Belusia.”


        “That. No that is not right. This is Lazarus City. There was only one.” the researcher said sternly.


        “Was there?” Eris replied.


        The view screen changed and the pleasant skies were ruptured by dark billows of smoke. Fires raged throughout the shattered city. Scarcely a building was left intact. Gunfire rattled through the streets. The screams of dying people resounded across the shattered walls of the city.
        She could see armored figures walking through the streets. Hundreds of them. They used explosive weapons to level buildings and lined up citizens against walls.


        “This is when the ISI attacked Lazarus.” the researcher choked as she watched the devastation.


        “No!” Eris replied. “Look closer.”


        The armored forms were not ISI infantry. They were of the Alpha Empire. Drones no doubt. They marched stiffly through the streets with flame weapons and grenades, destroying district after district. She watched with horror as a line of the same happy civilians she had seen before were gathered in front of a building. A moment later and a squad of drones opened fire with their armor piercing ammunition, brutal ripping them apart. She watched as they gunned down everyone in sight. Tears began to fill her eyes. She watched hundreds of people die right there and then. She watched families clutch each other in fear and defiance before infantry troops killed them. She watched terrified citizens hiding, only to be crushed by an armored hand. She watched as an Alpha Infantryman torched a building and burning children streamed out.


        “What is this? This is not what happened!” the researcher cried out.


        “This is the Alpha Empire’s conquest of Belusia, a former Inter Systems Initiative planet.” Eris said.


        “What? That can’t be, no it’s not how. The planet. Belusia. It was unclaimed. it wasn’t colonized.” the researcher desperately said.


        “Think. Look at the evidence. Lazarus City? Phoenix Station? You think those were named arbitrarly? You come from a buffer colony.” 


        The researcher’s surroundings changed from the top of the city to the direct center of it where Alpha Empire troops stood guard over an undamaged building.


        “What, what is this structure. I don’t recognize it.” the researcher said.


        “This is the storage of the genetic makeup of the entire population.” Eris said lightly.


        The researcher’s mind ached as she attempted to put together what Eris was implying. The genetic makeup of the population. The storehouse for future generations. Meaning. The researcher began shaking her head at the sudden realization.


        “Everyone on Belusia came from this structure.” the researcher said.


        Eris said nothing.


        “That means, we were all the descendants of the ISI who were murdered at Aroana City.” the researcher said.


        “You come from a buffer colony.” Eris said. “The sole purpose of Belusia in the eyes of the Alpha Empire was as a defensive position separating core Alpha planets from the Inter Systems Initiative. It’s destiny was to be reclaimed by the ISI. What happened at Lazarus Station… to you, was all preordained. It was your destiny to die at the hands of the ISI.”


        “No, that can’t be.” the researcher said, struggling to keep her voice level. “What about Phoenix Station!. It was not an asset just to be thrown away. What about that.”


“Phoenix Station was established as a research platform for projects that machines were incapable of speculating on.” Eris said. “Have you ever noticed anything odd about your superiors. The lack of contact? The text only communication?”


“I… what are you saying.”


“The Alpha Empire isn’t human. Not anymore.”


“Stop. Stop saying this. I don’t want to hear any more of this!” the researcher cried out.


“Look at the truth.” Eris said.


The surroundings changed once more. This time the vast gulf of stretched all around. The researcher found herself in the upper atmosphere of some planet. The planet below was a deep blue, likely an ocean world. Next to her Alpha Empire ships appeared and aimed their turrets at the planet below. The researcher’s eyes widened when she realized what was about to happen.


Missiles, rail guns and torpedoes all flew down towards the planet within seconds. The surroundings changed once more to show the target, a massive city constructed above the water. Closest to the researcher there was a tower with curious observers looking at the sky. 
In the space of a nanosecond a missile impacted and a massive fusion explosion engulfed the city. The researcher turned her head away as blinding light and the impossibly loud shock wave overcame her. She opened her eyes and saw nothing. Nothing but tidal waves coursing in every direction and steam.


Again she was in space, looking at a grey planet, more like a moon. She saw Alpha Empire warships appear and fire down on the planet.
She looked out at a moonbase, all the structures were large domes and the tubes connecting them. A rail gun rod impacted against the surface and shattered the surface. Massive chunks of rock ripped from the surface and launched into space carrying the shattered remains of the city. The largest crater the researcher had ever seen was all the remained.


Countless times the researcher saw the same scene on different planets over and over.


“Why are you showing me this!” the researcher said as a pristine forest paradise became nothing more but ash.


“Because this is what you were never shown.” Eris replied. “The Alpha Empire, for the past thirty years have been arriving at ISI worlds, obliterating them, and leaving. This entity you feel so much loyalty to feels none towards you. The Alpha Empire brutally murders billions of people in the name of an efficient way of waging war.”


“But I never saw any of this. Nothing even hinted at something like this.” the researcher said, her eyes wide and red.


“Everyone you ever interacted with. Everything. It was all designed. Designed so you would never know the horrors of what you blindly serve. The Alpha Empire tried to convert all of you. The vacuum suits. The lack of voice communication. The shortened sleep and lack of any stimulation aside from those deemed ‘efficient’ enough.”


“We were still human though.” the researcher said defiantly.


“You were.” Eris said. “For all its efforts, we know that there were those who could not adjust. We know some of you talked using your voice. That some of you left the safety of your vacuum suits and did other ‘inefficient’ things. Even advanced military hardware proved incompatible with your population. All the defending equipment was captured and outdated ISI hardware.”


The researcher thought back to all the moments she wasted time looking at Phoenix station’s central computer. Or her insistence on sleeping without the vacuum suit. Or even Commander Athelia and her decision to address all the combat forces without her helmet on and with her own voice. It all clicked. A painful, heart wrenching click.


“You were used Delfina.” Eris said.


The researcher recoiled at the sound of that name. It was a name she had not heard or read since the first five years of her life. It was her name.


“We accessed Phoenix Station records before it was destroyed.” Eris said.


“We know who you are. It is time for you to accept that.”


The room returned to its standard configuration and the lights came back on. The walls, ceiling and floor stopped transmitting images of dead planets. Eris remained in front of Delfina. Delfina tried to focus on her, tried to focus on everything she had just heard, but she only heard the pounding of her own heart growing louder in her ears as everything lost focus.


She just barely heard Eris’s distant voice before she fell unconscious.


“You have a lot to think about.”


Chapter 9: Enlightenment


        Alpha Empire.


        Alpha.


        Empire.


        Alpha Empire.


        These words. So full of meaning. So devoid of it. Everything she had believed in. Had Eris lied? Was it possible this was still propoganda? They were converting her. These were all just tools in their converting process... Right?
        How did they know of her tendencies? How could they possibly know of what had gone on at Phoenix Station? Spies? Intuition?
        
        Human.


        What did that mean? How was the Alpha Empire not human anymore? What could she still do? 


        So many questions. No answers. It was maddening. She could feel different parts of her mind splinter into groups. A bit of her wanted, no, needed to know more of the truth. Another part didn’t want to hear another word and wished for nothing more than to go to Alpha Prime and undo all that had been done to her. Yet another part just wanted to jump out an airlock and feel nothing but the vacuum of space for eternity.


        The researcher—Delfina— lay on the bed and writhed, her mind incapable of grasping so much. So many questions she never wasted time even thinking about kept racking her mind. 


        What remained of her mission? Could she still possibly deliver the algorithms to Alpha Prime? Did it matter? Would she want to? She needed to start deciding. Deciding which side to take.
        It shook her to the very core the implications of everything Eris had told her. There was no doubt most, if not all of it, was true. Delfina was a focused and diligent worker, but she recognized all the signs around her on Phoenix station. The feeling of something being out of place. Until now, she knew not what to make of that feeling. She knew not the cause. She knew not how much pain she would be in when she found out.
        ***
        Delfina constantly slipped in and out of consciousness. She lay on her bed at some points, on the floor and once she awoke briefly on one of the chairs. It is hard to say whether she thought more while awake or while asleep, but thinking was all she did. At one point she found food prepared on the table in front of her, but she cared not to eat it.
        Alpha Empire. ISI. Human. Three basic terms that held the entire meaning of Delfina’s life in them. She briefly entertained the notion, when not reliving the memories of the past weeks, if possibly there was another way. An option that involved neither denouncing the Alpha Empire or accepting them. 
But there was not.


The researcher grew increasingly restless. A lack of nutritional intake began to take its toll. The grief, the lack of food, the realization. It just made it worse. The researcher needed to get control again. Whatever she decided to do, she needed to act on it. But it was no use deciding. The Alpha Empire was all she ever knew. Yet the evidence was presented right there in her face. No matter how much she hid from it, she knew in her heart it was true.
She was awake now. Her mind in such pain from all the thinking she felt like it would explode. She brought her hands to her head in an instinctive motion to calm her thoughts and soothe the pain in her head.
When her fingertips grazed the top of her head she felt something odd. She kept rubbing her head, feeling the strange sensation. In front of her, the wall turned reflective of its own accord. Delfina tilted her head and her eyes grew wide.


Her hair was growing. Instead of a pale, bald head, she could see miniscule strands of dark hair coming out.
She stared for what felt like hours. She thought about nothing. She worried about nothing. She just stared at herself. She stared at her head. She stared at the light blue clothing she wore. And for the first time, there was no urge to tear off the clothes the ISI had given her.


“I want to know more.” the researcher whispered.


“I want to know more!” she said louder as she stood up.


A minute later the door behind her opened.


“What do you wish to know?” came Eris’s reply


***


        Eris embodied silver. Instead of the all black attire she wore last time, her clothing was all highly reflective silver. The garments were more simple too, instead of the jumpsuit she wore last time, her clothing seemed more loose and natural. Her long hair was held up and also colored silver. It looked like thousands of delicate little silver tubes. Her eyes were lined with silver and her lips as well.


Delfina looked at her, not like a cornered animal searching for a weakness as she had in the past, but like a human observing another human. She appreciated the silver clothing. The way it gleamed and looked so metallic. It was so different from the entirely bland room Delfina slept in.
        
        Eris nonchalantly sat in one of the chairs. She no longer wore the emotionless face she had before. It was more neutral. Non-threatening, yet not entirely familiar. Delfina continued to gaze at Eris, specifically her eyes. They too were a silver color, but even with the silver, Delfina could see so much more behind them. She realized Eris was looking back at her in much the same way. Delfina felt vulnerable at first. Realizing Eris looked right into the heart of her being and had so much more experience than Delfina had in understanding people. But the longer Delfina looked in Eris’s eyes, the more she wanted Eris to see who she was.
        Maybe, just maybe, Eris could look past the indoctrination of the Alpha Empire, the horrors of combat and the single minded efficiency of a scientist. Maybe, Eris could tell Delfina who she really was. Who she could have been had none of this befallen her.


        Delfina sat down in the other chair and took a deep breath. To her relief, the chair did not adhere to her. Eris sat calmly in front of her. Her mouth was expressionless. However, her eyes stared intently at Delfina. Delfina felt them pleading for her to ask a question.


        Delfina took another deep breath and asked Eris the question burning in her mind: “did anyone else from Belusia survive?”


        “Yes.” Eris replied, divulging nothing else.


        “How many?” Delfina asked again.


        “Around sixty percent of the ground-side civilian population.” Eris replied.


        Delfina’s brow furrowed and her eyes narrowed. She looked down on the floor and tried processing those numbers. Sixty percent?


        “But… how?” Delfina asked, looking back up.


        “When assaulting a buffer world, ISI military doctrine is to offer surrender first.” Eris began.


        “There was no such offer on Belusia.” the researcher said.


        “But there was.” Eris said, emotion creeping into her voice. “Alpha military command is under strict orders to treat any offers of surrender as a hoax. Non-military members like you are not privy to this information.”


        “Then how did the ISI spare so much of the civilian population?” Delfina asked.


        “General Oleg, the man in charge of the operation, ordered every single drone unit to broadcast a surrender message once the outcome of the battle was clear. He would have done this sooner if it had not meant revealing the location of all his troops.”


        “Were there any military survivors?”


“Unfortunately, as you are well aware, Alpha Empire forces are subject to heavy indoctrination against us. Very few surrendered like the civilians. We managed to subdue several, but it is very difficult not to kill the operator of military hardware. It is unfortunate that so many die for such twisted ideals, but there is no other way.”


        Delfina winced at the mentioning of the word “twisted”. Eris still hadn’t presented any evidence of what she just stated. Until then, the ISI would be just as twisted as the Alpha Empire. This line of reasoning brought up another thought. Another that needed to be answered sooner rather than later.


        “What will you do with me?” Delfina asked firmly.


        “That depends on you.” Eris replied flatly.


        “Can you elaborate?” Delfina asked skeptically.


        “I could. But it is best if you find out yourself.” Eris said.


        Delfina felt annoyance rising out of her. It was clear Eris would continue denying her information until something happened. Until enough time passed? Until Delfina declared her unwavering loyalty to the ISI? What was it?


        “Everything I withhold from you,” Eris said, interrupting the researcher’s thoughts, “is for your benefit over time. You must make amends with yourself in terms of your loyalties, your motivations, and your conscience. 


        “So you want me to declare my allegiance to the Inter Systems Initiative?” Delfina asked coldly.
        
        “Ideally, yes.” Eris replied.


        “And if I don’t?” Delfina asked defiantly.


        “It would be… understandable.” replied Eris, choosing her words carefully. “Regarding buffer worlds and civilians, the ISI aims to free you. You are not mandated to become a part of the ISI, as beneficial as that would be. I should add, however, that should you choose not to live on an ISI world, you will be utterly on your own.”
        “And what if I go back to the Alpha Empire?” Delfina asked, testing the limits of the supposed “generosity” of the ISI.


        “Unfortunately, we cannot let you do that.” Eris said.


        “Because I would be a liability? I would have too much information?” Delfina said.


        “No.” Eris replied, lacking the warmth in her previous words. “Because the Alpha Empire would kill you.”


        “Why would they do that?” Delfina asked.


        “Because you are a liability to them. Even on Belusia you were a liability. You still haven’t met the ‘citizens’ of the Alpha Empire Delfina. They are nothing like you and I.” Eris said.


        Delfina paused. She was not expecting Eris to let her return, but their reasoning surprised her. She could feel Eris playing her emotions. Attempting to convince her to abandon the Alpha Empire. If only she was more subtle and let Delfina decide on her own.


        “I still have an issue with the reliability of all this data that you have shown me,” stated the researcher.


        “I suspected no less. Your technical background aboard Phoenix stations has grounded you in a world of factual data and straightforward logic. I see that now.” Eris said. “What I am trying to do is offer you the choice of returning to humanity or rejecting it forever. This is a choice only you can make that we cannot force you to make.”


        “I believe you will force me if I decide not to join you.” Delfina said.


        “We won’t. We have tried before and every situation met with failure. It is why we invest so many resources in —” Eris said.


        “Where were you created?” Delfina asked, cutting her off.


“Planet Proxis II. Andeleer Lab, chamber 8.” Eris answered without hesitation.


“So you were grown outside a human. Just like me.” Delfina mused.


“If you view the ISI as some sort of backwards nation that vilifies technology then you will be surprised. The difference between the ISI and Alpha Empire comes down to what we value most. The ISI values our humanity. The Alpha Empire values efficiency. The same kind of efficiency that renders life meaningless.”


Delfina rubbed her head with her hand. She focused on the tingling feeling her fingertips got from feeling her hair. It felt so alien and normal at the same time. She thought about the word “efficiency”. She was starting to have the same feeling about it.


“Eris, I would like to think some more about what you told me today.” Delfina said.


“Take all the time you need.” Eris replied.


Eris promptly left.


***
        The researcher sat on her bed once more, feeling very strange. After eating, she found she could no longer dispose of byproducts the same way as she could in her suit. Instead, a small facility slid out of the wall and she relieved herself in the most primitive way possible.
She hadn’t even left the room of this ship yet and she already felt exposed to an entirely different way of living. She feared what waited for her beyond the door Eris and Derick walked in through. Feared and wondered.
        
        Time was not on Delfina’s side. The ship she was on would arrive at its destination at some point. Then it would be put in phase and shortly thereafter it would arrive at whatever ISI world it was heading towards. This left a lot of unknowns.
        Of course, unknowns were nothing new. Her entire time aboard this ship was one giant unknown. Apparently she hadn’t known important things for most her life. It felt frustrating. Like having her life dictated without her having any input. So much information was hidden from her. Both the Alpha Empire and ISI were at fault for that. Neither being completely honest.
        It was time for that to end. The researcher truly needed to find a way to find out exactly what the ISI and Alpha Empire didn’t want her to know. Only then could she make these momentous decisions. Until she penetrated the veil of secrecy surrounding her, she needed a way to find out more information. Staying in her room was starting to bore her. It was time to expand.
        Delfina stretched her arms out and laid down on her bed. She desired sleep immensely. The times she had slept here before were constantly broken by fear, anxiety and, disappointment. Now she had a plan. And with a plan in mind she could finally get some useful sleep.
***
        Delfina awoke sharply. She instantly stood up and closed her eyes while rethinking her course of action. She had decided. It was the only way.


        “Eris. I want to join the ISI.” Delfina said loudly.


        A few seconds later the door slid open and Eris walked in.


        There were no dark lips or silver hair. This time Eris walked in wearing a flowing white dress. Her face had absolutely no artificial coloration and her hair was colored a powerful blonde. As Delfina watched Eris gracefully approach, she could think only one thing; Eris looked beautiful.


        “Do you mean what you say?” Eris asked in a soothing tone.


        “Absolutely.” Delfina said, hoping Eris wouldn’t question her resolve again.


        “Then it is time we leave this room.” Eris said. “Do you have any final questions?”


        “Just one.” Delfina said.


        “Anything.” Eris replied.


        “Why do you constantly change your appearance every time we meet?”


        Eris smiled and touched her fingertips to her lips. “Because it is how I want to. I dress the same way I feel. Now please,” she said excitedly, taking Delfina’s hand and leading her through the doorway, “you have a lot to experience.”


        No sooner had they left the doorway then noise surrounded Delfina. At first she instinctively recoiled, still remembering the horrible discharges of weaponry in battle. But she looked around herself and saw at least a dozen people—dressed in the light blue that she wore—clapping.


        She looked at all the faces; the smiles. She could not help but smile a little herself. She smiled until she saw one person clapping harder than the rest. This person smiled brightly and Delfina watched as her eyes started to tear up. Delfina knew this person.


        It was Dana. The same Dana who Delfina heard die on Phoenix station. The same one she had spent two decades working with. The same one she had grieved and missed all these weeks.


        And she was alive.






Chapter 10: Life


        The researcher paused a diagnostic and ordered Phoenix Station’s central computer to lower the test’s priority, so that the other research teams could make better use of it.
        A message kept blinking in the corner of the vacuum suit’s display. The researcher kept trying to focus on it so it would open, but was having no luck. The vacuum suit seemed completely alien and unnecessary for the researcher. Every five minutes it seemed, there would be some sort of issue. What ever happened to normal clothing?
        After what seemed like the hundredth time, the researcher successfully opened the message.


        New member assigned to staff. Class: Communication specialist rank 2. ID: CG2910940118.


        The message had been automatically sent by Phoenix Station’s central computer. Besides the text, it showed a very basic visualization of the person’s face. A young woman. The researcher queried the computer.


        What is the new staff member’s name?


        The computer processed the query for an additional nanosecond, unsure as to why the researcher would ask for information it had just provided.


        CG2910940118.


        The researcher sighed. Not the Identification sequence. I mean the spoken name.


Unofficial identification: Dana.


Dana. An interesting name. Dana was the first staff member assigned directly under the researcher’s supervision. It seemed the researcher’s skill was proving useful for the Alpha Empire. This brought a distinct sense of pride.


But pride was inefficient. 


The researcher re-queued another diagnostic for the main computer to carry out.


***
Before Delfina could react, Dana ran up to her and embraced her. Dana relaxed her hold on Delfina when she felt her stiffen briefly. Delfina was not sure how to react. Never had someone hugged her, it felt awkward to have so much physical contact with someone so suddenly.


Dana let go and took a step back. Delfina gazed at her. The applause in the room suddenly sounded distant.


She wore no vacuum suit, only the same, simple clothing Delfina herself wore. Her face was pale, but her hair was at ear length. And it was blonde. She looked at her eyes; a deep, enchanting blue. She saw the smile Dana had, and how it contrasted with the worry in her eyes. She had known this woman for two decades. Twenty arduous years. And this was the first time she truly saw what Dana looked like.
        
        “Did you hear me Delfina?” came Eris’s voice.


        Delfina blinked and the sound of conversations and clapping around her became loud again.


        “What did you say?” Delfina asked.


        “I said you can go with Dana to the mess hall. She knows where it is.”


        Delfina looked back at Dana who looked back at her. She then took Delfina’s hand and led her through a corridor to a large room with plenty of tables and chattering. 


        “What is this place?” Delfina asked, looking at the selection of foodstuffs arrayed at one end of the room and the people talking everywhere else.


        “This is where we eat.” Dana said.


        “I… I do not understand why there is an entire room this large for that.” Delfina said.


        “Because it is for more than just eating, let us get some food, we have everything to talk about.”
        ***
        Dana sat across from Delfina in a secluded corner of the mess hall, both having trays loaded with food but neither eating. Around them were other crew members conversing and eating. Some wore the same light blue clothing that Delfina and Dana wore. Some wore more specialized clothing: variations of the vacuum suit, jumpsuits and one individual who stood alone in the corner wore full combat armor. 
“I wanted to go in and see you so bad. I begged them to let me in. But Eris said it was absolutely crucial for me not to interfere. I still can’t believe you are alive Delfina!”


        “Everything is… very intense right now.” Delfina replied carefully. “I am not entirely sure what is going on here. And I do not really know what I am doing.”


        “Believe me, after a few days everything will make a lot more sense. But for now, it will be difficult to process just how different the ISI are from what we thought they were.” Dana said worriedly.


        “How are you alive Dana? I heard you scream aboard Phoenix Station.” Delfina said, struggling to control her voice.


        Dana took a deep breath. “When the ISI marines barged through the door, they shot me with a penetrator round right through my arm. The entire thing got torn off and I was knocked unconscious. From what they told me, I was stuffed in a bag right before they evacuated the station.”


        Dana rolled up her left arm sleeve with her right hand. Delfina winced when she saw Dana had no left arm. It just looked as if nothing had ever protruded from her shoulder.


        “They say I will probably get a new arm upon entering an ISI world.” Dana continued.


        “It looks terrible.” Delfina said bluntly, “are you okay?”


        “It doesn’t hurt anymore.” Dana said. “I honestly was happy I was shot for a time.”


        Delfina’s expression turned into a frown, “how... how could you possibly like it?”


        Dana looked at her food and tapped it with a spork. “It helped with the pain. The pain that came when they showed everything the Alpha Empire was doing.”


“How long have you been here?” Delfina asked.


“I spent two weeks on a cruiser right after the fight. Then I was transferred to this 
rehabilitation ship right after for the next five weeks. I know you just finished rehab, it’s all still fresh. All the pain, the confusion. It gets better Delfina. You made the right choice.”


        “The right choice?” Delfina asked defensively.


        “Not everyone made the same choice we did.” Dana said quietly, “Ethar survived to.”


        “Where is he now?” Delfina questioned.


        Dana swallowed and closed her eyes. “He was still being treated for stasis shock so he was in no position to resist when the ISI marines found him in the medical bay on Phoenix.”


        “Where is he now?” Delfina repeated, fear giving her voice an acidic touch.


        “We were transferred to this ship together. There were several others with us when we underwent the beginnings of rehabilitation. They led us out one by one to show us what the Alpha Empire really was. When Ethar went in he never really came back out. He kept getting more and more agitated by everything. He was so furious at being lied to. Everything just started degenerating. Long after everyone else had completed rehabilitation he struggled to comprehend what really happened. He turned his rage against the ISI and against everyone, even me.”


“What happened Dana?” pressed Delfina.


“He killed himself!” Dana whimpered with tears in her eyes.


        Delfina put her hands on her lips in shock. She felt like she did back in the ice caves of Belusia. She watched as tears rolled down Dana’s cheeks. She refused to look at Delfina.


        “I should not have brought it up.” Delfina said in what she hoped was an apologetic tone.


        “It is okay.” Dana said in between wiping tears. She turned to face Delfina again. “You don’t know how to read people’s emotions yet. All you know how to do is communicate cold, hard data.”


        Delfina felt relieved that Dana forgave her, but a little offended that Dana did not believe she possessed the ability to communicate well. It was undoubtedly true however. Delfina was not really sure how she felt. She looked at Dana’s red eyes and felt… disappointment at having caused her sorrow. She didn’t know what prompted her, but she reached out with her hand and touched Dana’s remaining hand.


        “There is hope for you Delfina,” Dana said with a slight, reassuring smile. “Hope for all of us. I hope we can live a life like we were meant to. Like people.”


        “I hope you are right.” Delfina said.


        “Hey Dana!” came a male voice from behind Delfina. She turned in surprise to see a woman and two men approaching with their trays.


        The man in front stopped suddenly. “Oh I hope I am not disturbing you two.”


 “Don’t worry.” Dana said, “please, sit down.”


The three newcomers sat down. Delfina looked at them observantly. The woman was dressed in a jumpsuit, indicating she was part of the crew. Her brown hair was neatly arranged in a bun. Her lips and eyelids were both colored a deep royal blue, aesthetically complementing her dark skin. “This is Flight Officer Priya.” Dana gestured.
The man who had previously called out had some sort of heat resistant suit on. He was shorter than most of the crew and had a few wrinkles. His hair was red and shaved at the sides. He had a grin on his face. “This is Engineer Harold.”


Harold’s grin only grew and he said, “Please, call me Harry.”


The other man who sat down wore the same clothing as Delfina. By the looks of his ultra pale face and relatively short hair, he had undergone rehabilitation at the same time as Dana. His expression was noticeably less joyful than Harold’s. “And Mateus.”


“This is Delfina. She finished isolation ten minutes ago.” Dana said.


“Ten minutes ago!” Harold exclaimed, “welcome to the world!”


“You don’t seem like you just finished isolation. How do you feel?” Priya asked.


“A little overwhelmed.” Delfina replied hesitantly.


        “Spend another week on this ship and you’ll be underwhelmed as hell, eh Priya?” Harry laughed. “It gets so damn boring here sometimes.”


        “Boring? Do you not have tasks to complete?” Delfina inquired.


        “Well yeah…” Harry began.


        “But some of our ‘tasks’ are better than others.” Priya interrupted with a wink.


        “Piloting a craft ain’t all it’s cracked up to be.” Harold replied, a little dismayed.


        “And I suppose scraping gunk out of the engines is better?” Priya replied mockingly.


        Delfina focused on their interaction, clearly confused. What they said was of little value. Every duty on a ship had to be fulfilled to keep it running at peak capacity. Yet they were conversing in such a way that was making them slightly hostile to one another.


        “Do you not like each other Flight Officer Priya and Engineer Harold?” Delfina asked.


        Both of them looked at each other and they laughed.


        “No, no we are good friends.” Harold said.


        “Among the ISI, it is normal for friends to make negative remarks to each other in a display of affection.” Dana said.


        “I don’t know about affection,” Harold said, “but please do not equate me with the entirety of the ISI. I represent Harry and just Harry. You can bet those buffoons commanding this show ain’t nothing like us grunts out here.”


        Delfina nodded, processing the new knowledge to the best of her ability.


        “So what am I to do now?” she asked.


        “Learn.” Dana said.


        “And adapt.” Matheus added in, his low voice causing Delfina to look at him.


        Matheus continued: “The people on this ship are varied and each one will tell you a different perspective. You can ask them about life in the ISI, their service and their beliefs. But in reality, we are awaiting final confirmation to be assimilated with the ISI population.”


        Harold coughed and said, “we technically aren’t supposed to tell you that but he ain’t wrong.”


        “We have psychiatric evaluations once every day.” Dana said neutrally.


        “What are they like?” Delfina queried.


        “Very revealing.” Mateus said emotionlessly.


        “Automated.” Harold said.


        Dana blushed and said, “Excuse me. It just happens.”


        “What are we talking about now?” Delfina asked.


        “Most of us crew don’t socialize with you guys because you got this tendency to get all emotionless and daunting. It can get really scary really quickly.” Harold said.


        “He says ‘automated’ whenever it happens to so I can work on eliminating that way of speaking.” Dana explained.


        “I don’t understand, speaking how? What is so wrong with it?” Delfina asked, clearly perplexed.


        “Honey,” Priya said, “you just finished isolation so you don’t need to worry about it right now. What they mean is that sometimes, because the lack of inflection in your voice, you can end up sounding very lifeless. It is not your fault, but the result of only transferring data instead of actual conversations.”


        “How can I sound lifeless?” Delfina asked. “Clearly if I make a noise I am not lifeless. I have to be alive to speak.”


        “Not literally lifeless,” Mateus said. “Lifeless as in you are not experiencing anything. Kind of like what it feels like trying to reach peak efficiency.”


        “And is there something wrong with trying to reach peak efficiency?” Delfina responded, her voice unintentionally rising until she had yelled the word efficiency.


        The conversation and clinking of utensils suddenly quieted as everyone in the mess hall turned to look at Delfina. 


        Delfina looked in horror, never having so many people look at her at once. Her face reddened and she stood up abruptly. The man in the armored suit glared at her with absolute disgust, but did not make any moves. Delfina quickly paced out the nearest door and into the hallway. Dana quickly got up and followed her.


        Harold nonchalantly took their trays and dumped the food onto his. As the conversation in the mess hall resumed, he turned to Mateus and chuckled.


        “To think that would have been you less than a month ago.”


        Mateus turned to Harold and with a tiny hint of a smile replied, “don’t test me Harold. You have a way of getting under former Alpha citizens’ skin.”




The researcher interfaced with Phoenix Station’s main computer from the researcher’s lab. Currently, the researcher attempted to access the files for the groundside Laboratory 15.
Less than fifteen hours prior, the computer had informed the researcher that an intact ISI command mech had been captured and was en route to the lab for study and decrypting. The endeavours name: Project Enigma. All of the researcher’s prior projects were reassigned to other research teams on the station. The central computer designated the researcher as Phoenix Station’s most useful asset, therefore it would fall to the researcher to unravel the secrets of ISI communication protocol.
But until the actual unit arrived, the researcher was ordered to familiarize on all forms of encryption and communication possible. This enabled the researcher to access highly restricted history files. Among these files were a specific type of communication utilizing radio waves native to systems where human infants were in the vicinity. The system itself was designed to prevent any sort of damage to children and their cells genetic integrity. Now it was hopelessly obsolete and useless, but the reading prompted an idea in the researcher’s head.
The researcher was born on Belusia, in a laboratory much like the one the obsolete communication system was designed for. The researcher wondered if it might be possible to see the video feed of that lab. Maybe see if the caretakers were still there. This thought was horribly inefficient and would take up resources dedicated to progress for the Alpha Empire.
But still the researcher had a need, from a source she did not know, to access the video feed of the laboratory. She felt the strange urge to do so and it dominated her thoughts and actions.


Eventually, she noticed that Ethar, Draston and Saris were all missing from the lab. Their four hour sleep cycles had somehow synced up. This left only Dana in the lab. If the researcher was to access the video feed, now was the time. So she interfaced with the central computer to access Laboratory 15, her birthplace. Maybe she would see her caretakers, Laura, Bruce and Jansel. They were the only people she remembered interacting directly with. Although it was inefficient, some part of her longed for that interaction again.


Access granted. Videofeed online.


The researcher cycled through the various video feeds of the facility. Some showed embryo storage containers in refrigerators. Some showed row upon row of zygotes undergoing accelerated growth in glass containers. Another video feed showed the babies fully grown in the same containers with automated drones cycling through them to make sure all growing conditions were ideal. The researcher felt a strange happiness overtake her, looking at these images of her past. Her anticipation grew over the next video feed. But when she switched to it, only sadness filled her.
Instead of the caretakers the researcher had grown to adore in youth, there were children of various ages all accessing data terminals. No doubt they were undergoing augmented education. The researcher knew that the moment they stopped physically growing, they would be issued vacuum suits and shipped out where they were needed. The lack of caretakers perturbed the researcher. She saw no reason to deny the same experiences that served as the researcher’s fondest memories. She queried the computer to determine where the caretakers were now.


Citizens CG2910940560, CG2910942223 and CG2910459061 reassigned to vehicle maintenance. 


        The researcher sighed. Her thoughts went back to the language lessons from Bruce, the mathematics courses from Laura and the principles of the Alpha Empire from Jansel. Each one of them had taught her and cared for her until she was shipped off to Phoenix Station. Seeing them replaced by data terminals felt counterintuitively inefficient.


        Head researcher, what are you doing?


        The message had come from Dana. The researcher’s inefficient time usage would surely be reported. It was a terrible and inefficient idea to access that information. It could lead to her being lowered in rank. Whatever happened the researcher surely deserved.


        Accessing groundside data.


        Certainly Dana could see what she was doing from the holographic display that the researcher interfaced with. A message promptly arrived for the researcher.


        YOur inefficient usage of station resources has been noted. But, i have decided not to report it. What were you accessing?


        Video feed for the laboratory where i was manufactured. 


        Did you learn anything?


        The caretaker system has been replaced by data terminals.


        Dana turned to face the researcher and the researcher looked back at Dana. They could not see past the masks of the vacuum suits but the researcher pretended to see Dana’s face based on the basic visualization provided to the researcher almost a decade ago when Dana had joined the team. Dana sent back a reply and returned to her station.


        Unfortunate.


        ***




Delfina clenched her fists and briskly walked down a hallway from the mess hall. She passed nothing but a series of cyan doors on the walls. The submission of the former Alpha Empire citizens to these inefficient methods infuriated her. She could not throw away a lifetime’s worth of effort. Seeing the very same people she called her own squander their own ideals put everything she had once stood for in peril. She did not feel the same intense hatred towards the ISI that she once had, but to completely disregard everything. To completely ignore the drive towards efficiency? That was the entire meaning of life. 
Anger coursed through her body and she had no idea how to get rid of it. The way everyone had looked at her in the mess hall. The self-conscious feelings that evoked. She had no idea how to deal with that. It terrified her and that made her even more enraged. She did not want to be an outsider. Mateus had betrayed the Alpha Empire. And Dana. She had…


“Delfina! Wait up! Where are you going?” Dana shouted after her.


“I don’t know where I am going. But I just need to go somewhere.” Delfina said, her nostrils flaring.


“Come with me to our state room. You can vent there. I specifically asked for us to get the same one.” Dana said calmly.


Dana keyed the controls next to a specific door and it opened, revealing a tiny room with two beds stacked vertically.


Delfina walked inside and Dana shut the door.


“Dana. I do not understand how everyone can have no issue with regards to everything we stood for.”


“You just finished isolation. Everything is happening too fast for you right now. Once you spend a couple weeks on this ship with these people. You’ll understand why we no longer uphold the Empire’s ideals.”


“I just don’t get it. We spent decades together working in the name of efficiency for the Alpha Empire. And to completely discredit that?” Delfina blurted.


“Delfina, did you really mean it when you said you wanted to join the ISI?” Dana asked skeptically.


“Of course! How dare you question my resolve Dana?” Delfina hissed.


“What the hell? You aren’t my superior anymore Delfina. Don’t try to treat me as if you are okay?” Dana replied firmly.


“Hell? Everyone keeps saying that? What does it mean? Everything is so confusing right now.” Delfina said, her anger giving way to hopelessness.


“It’s just how people talk. I’ll explain it to you later. What’s important now is that you realize everyone here is here to help you. No one wishes you harm and all we want to do is see you happy.” Dana said tenderly.


Delfina’s eyes began to water and she gazed back at Dana.


“Do you speak the truth Dana?” Delfina asked.


“Of course Delfina. So much has wrong us but I am here by your side.”


Delfina could not contain the flurry of emotions. The rage at being disgraced publicly. The indignity of having every ideal conflicted. The loss of almost every one and the carnage she had witnessed. And Dana, who she had missed most of all and stood right in front of her only wanting for her to be happy. No one had ever wanted Delfina to be happy. No one had ever cared.


Delfina sat on the lower bed and brought her knees up in front of her, burying her head in her arms. She began to sob, not knowing how to express all the emotions within her. 
Dana softly wrapped her arm around Delfina. She kissed her neck and whispered, “I was exactly where you are now. It will get better. I am here for you, now and always.”
 
They remained that way for an indeterminate time. Embracing. Delfina stopped thinking and just focused on how Dana’s arm felt around her. She had never felt more secure in her life. She could feel Dana’s chest rise and fall as she breathed, and her chin which rested on Delfina’s shoulder.


“It’s so strange how things turn out.” Dana said lightly.


“Like who the ISI really are?” Delfina whispered.


“That is strange too, but I mean us. You were always my superior. ‘The venerable researcher.’ Do you know how glad I was to work with you? On Phoenix Station you were practically a legend. You solved any puzzle. Cracked any code. You were absolutely fascinating. I looked up to you my whole life. And here we are now, just the two of us with no research. No worries about efficiency or the war. And finally we are able to see each other and feel each other without vacuum suits. It feels —”
        
“—wonderful” Delfina finished.


“You agree?” Dana asked a bit sheepishly.


“Yes, I do Dana. It isn’t just the feeling of contact. It’s contact with you. Of everyone on the team, you were the only that felt… human to me. Do you understand what I mean?”


“Yeah, I think I do,” Dana said, touching her head to Delfina’s. “Delfina, do you remember that time I caught you looking up the lab where you were born?” 


“Of course.” Delfina replied.


“I had a really big internal struggle that day.” Dana said.


“About reporting me?” Delfina replied?


“No,” Dana said, “that was never in question. I wasn’t sure how to tell you what I felt.”


“What did you feel?” Delfina asked innocently.


“I wasn’t sure at the time. I wanted to tell you that I understood what you felt. That you were the most talented individual I had ever met. That I saw you as more than just a researcher.”


“You really wanted to say all that?” Delfina asked curiously.


“I did. Never, in all my years on Phoenix Station, was I ever so divided on what to do. I panicked though. And all I said was unfortunate. That one word. I regretted it every day until now. I never said what I really felt.”


“That you were human and you saw me as human?” Delfina said.


“No. That I loved you.” Dana said.


Delfina slowly pulled herself out of Dana’s embrace and turned to face her on the bed.


“That you loved me?” Delfina asked, tilting her head to one side in confusion. 


Dana took her hand and placed it on Delfina’s cheek. Delfina looked back at Dana, feeling confused and excited. Delfina had never felt this way before but she could feel her heart start to beat faster and her body getting warmer. She didn’t know what to do, so she places her hands on Dana’s sides. She watched as Dana drew closer, their faces mere centimeters from each other. She stared at Dana’s blue eyes and her blonde bangs that swayed ever so slightly. She then moved her gaze onto Dana’s lips. 
She felt her heart beat faster and faster as Dana drew even nearer and their lips touched. She closed her eyes and felt euphoria course throughout her body. Being this close to someone she cared about just felt so… powerful.
She opened her eyes and ever so slightly pushed Dana so that Dana laid on her back and Delfina remained right on top of her. Their lips disconnected and Delfina pushed herself up, still right above Dana.
She gazed once more into Dana’s eyes. She saw nothing but adoration and… love? The concept was so new to her. All of this was so new to her. She held herself above Dana, completely stunned. Both of them breathed heavily and Delfina watched as Dana’s chest rose and fell. She looked at Dana’s blonde hair, impossibly longer than her own. She looked at Dana’s sides and all her curves. She looked at her legs, covered under the ISI colored pants. Delfina slowly scanned her. It felt like she was looking at a completely different person. She noticed Dana was doing the same thing.


Eventually Dana broke the silence, “what was that?” she asked.


“That was a kiss.” Dana said.


“I’ve never felt like that before.” Delfina said.


“Me neither.” Dana said, “I heard some of the crew talk about it but it seemed so weird at the time. Can we just lay here? Together? It would mean so much to me.”


“I… would like that too.” Delfina said.


She moved over to the side and rolled to hold Dana in her arms. So many thoughts coursed through her mind, but they didn’t come as words. They came as feelings. Feelings of proximity. Touch. Care.


She felt warm.
***










Chapter 12: Complications


Delfina woke first, opening her eyes to see Dana’s hair in her face. Although it blocked her vision, she enjoyed the smell of her hair, and the feeling as it brushed against her face. She also enjoyed holding onto Dana, and the warmth that they radiated together. She liked it so much she held onto Dana a little tighter, hoping she would never have to let go. This woke Dana and she turned to face Delfina.


“Hi.” Dana smiled.


“Uh, hi Dana.” Delfina responded with an awkward smile.


“Did you sleep okay?” Dana asked, blinking.


“I do not think I have ever slept so well.” Delfina said. “What happened before, I do not really know what it was. But I enjoyed it greatly.”


“I’m glad.” Dana said. “But I am also starving. You left the mess hall in such a rush neither of us got to eat!”


Delfina felt her own stomach growl in the way that she finally identified as hunger.


***
After they got their trays, both of them sat next to Harold. He was busy spooning protein mix into his mouth while eyeing a holographic display coming from his wrist.


“Oh hey there you two! Everything better? Dana help you with all those emotions?” Harold asked.


“I think everything is great.” Dana said.


“We kissed.” Delfina said excitedly, Dana visibly blushed.


“Kissed?” Harold repeated, “Dana, you were supposed to ease her feelings, not add to them. This is why we have professional rehabilitators on this ship. Poor girl is confused enough as is.”


“I think everything is fine.” Delfina said.


“Of course you do. I remember when I had my first kiss I thought everything was dandy for a week straight.” Harold chuckled.


“Mateus isn’t here.” Dana remarked.


“He’s in psych. Should be out soon.” Harold said a little more seriously.”Your first psych evaluation is soon, right Delfina?”


“I think so. Should I be worried?” Delfina asked.


“Not really. Might make you a bit uncomfortable, but I think you will be fine.” Harold said. A couple numbers suddenly flashed on his display. “Alright ladies, I’m gonna have to cut this a bit short. Got some stuff I need to supervise.


Delfina noticed as he got up that the armored man stood in the corner once more. His expression looked just as unfriendly as last time.


“Delfina, you do not know this yet, but try not to tell anyone about what we did. From what I can tell, people do not share information about their intimate encounters. At least not aboard this ship. It makes me feel… embarrassed.” Dana said.


“What is that personnel doing in the corner?” Delfina asked, looking directly at the armored figure.


Dana sighed and turned. Once she saw whom Delfina was referring to she said, “oh him.”


“Yes. Him. Do you have any information?”


“I know he showed up at the same time as you did. I think he was part of the team that captured you but I am not entirely sure.” Dana said. “Harold says that he is the only one on the ship that has seen combat. Normally, the people here are not allowed to be veterans I think.”


“I noticed that he carries disgust in his eyes. Not unlike my own that I feel occasionally.” Delfina said.


“But not anymore… yes? Don’t worry about him. Eat instead. Talk to me.” Dana smiled.


“I believe that everyone aboard this vessel has been extensively trained on how to handle us. That man does not belong here though. I think I can gain information by interfacing with him.” Delfina said.


“Delfina!” Dana cried out. “I have three points of information you should seriously consider. One, I think that is a terrible idea: you will only enrage him and gain distrust. Two, you sound so robotic it makes my hands tremble. Three, this is the second time you ignored what I said.”
“I can get extremely focused sometimes. You of all people should know this. But I do apologize. Being here and treating all these crew members as friends makes me deeply uncomfortable. At the moment I do not know if I am reacting predictably or if this will be a long standing issue. Regardless, I must know more about our current situation through any means possible, even if I somehow provoke someone. It surprises me you do not share this sentiment.” Delfina stated.


Dana groaned and crossed her arms while leaning back in her seat. “Do as you wish.”


Delfina stood up from her table and took the most direct path to the fully armored man. His eyes turned to face her but his fairly relaxed posture remained the same. She tried her best impression of a friendly smile.


“Hello there. May I ask why you keep glancing at me?” Delfina asked.


The armored guard stood erect and smiled.


“Why? Because I think you are very attractive.” he said. He stared her right in the eyes while moving his jaw, maintaining a smile. He spoke in what seemed like a friendly tone, but his eyes burned with energy. Strange.


“Thank you… I think. I was not aware that I was attractive.” Delfina replied slowly, judging the man’s reaction.


“Oh if I could have it my way, I would have you, and everyone like you, stuffed into a room with me and nothing else.” While he spoke, Delfina noticed his hands curling into fists at his sides.


A crew member from a nearby table stood up and quietly said, “lieutenant, I do not advise this course of action.”


At that moment, Delfina realized that maybe the man’s smile was not genuine. His eyes kept staring at her with increased intensity.


“But I just want her to know how strongly I feel about her and her kind.” he continued. “You see, unlike the rest of the cupcakes on this ship, I know what you are normally like. I’ve seen what you do to people. And looking at you specifically, you’ll never know what it is like to be human.”


Delfina’s unconvincing smile disappeared, “so you have seen combat? What do you fight for if you think I can never change.”


“I fight to keep your hands off the people I love. Don’t think your little ploy is working. You are smart. You think you can get information from me. But I know you will turn at the first available opportunity. I know.” he said looking down at her.


“Lieutenant Siskind! Stand down!” a voice yelled from down the hallway. A fully uniformed woman walked in. She stood far straighter than the rest of the crew and walked with vigor. Her face bore more than a few wrinkles and her graying hair was wrapped in a tight bun.


“Aye captain.” Lieutenant Siskind said. Without any hesitation he stood back and stared straight ahead of him.


The captain looked directly at Delfina. “Time for your psyche evaluation.”


***


        “Delfina. I will ask again. What do you think of when you hear the words Inter Systems Initiative?” Derick said.


        “I think of nothing.” Delfina grumbled.


        “I find that response frustrating.” Derick sighed.


        “I find this entire line of questioning frustrating!” Delfina replied with vigor. “This is an interrogation. The only difference is you pretend it is not, and that... that is why it is frustrating.”


        “An interesting line of thought.” Derick said, more robotic sounding than any citizen of the Alpha Empire. “What do you think of your experience so far?”


        “I have insufficient data to answer that question.” Delfina said.


        Derick paused before asking, “is there a reason you are so uncooperative Delfina? You seemed completely willing to work with us initially.”


        “Is there a reason for this pointless psychiatric evaluation?” Delfina replied.


        “To ensure your time under the Alpha Empire’s influence did not impair your ability to assimilate into society. Now that I answered your question, can you answer mine?”


        “I am not refusing to cooperate with you.” Delfina said.


        Derick opened his mouth, but had no response.


        “I am, however,” Delfina continued, “unaware of how any of the previous questions are of benefit to you, me or anyone. There is a clear line of reasoning for ensuring that a person is in satisfactory mental condition. The line of reasoning that you pursue, is not.”


        “I am trying to work with you here Delfina. We can help each other help you. The more you cooperate with us now, the faster you can acclimate to normal society when we arrive.”


        “And where exactly will we be arriving? You have been very cryptic with the location.” Delfina said.


        “Well it has been a security concern.” Derick said apologetically.


        “Am I not a member of the ISI? You do not think I still sympathize with the Alpha Empire, do you?” Delfina challenged. “Even if you did tell me, how am I going to contact the Alpha Empire?”


        Delfina noticed a small light appear in Derick’s eye. She studied it and after a moment it shut off. 


“No. Of course not. The world we are traveling to is Quella, in the Nairobi system.” Derick said.


The same light Delfina had spotted before appeared again. It was miniscule and quick. Someone not intently studying Derick’s eyes would have never noticed. But not Delfina. She had just gained all the information she needed from this evaluation.


“We can end your psych evaluation Delfina. I apologize for any stress this may have caused you.” Derick said with a slight bow.


“Do not fear. The amount of stress this causes is minimal. I do have a question however.” Delfina said.


“What is your question?” Derick asked.


“What can you tell me about Lieutenant Siskind?” Delfina asked.
“Oh, um…” Derick stammered, clearly waiting. Waiting for that damnable little light in the corner of his eye to direct him. But much to Delfina’s amusement, the light never came. After a thoroughly uncomfortable time elapsed Derick said, “I’m afraid not much.”


***
Delfina lay on one end of the bunk, Dana on the other. Both of their knees were bent so that there feet could intermingle. The physical contact soothed and distracted Delfina, but it was a welcome distraction nevertheless.


“So, do you want to talk about your psychiatric evaluation now?” Dana asked.


“Actually, I was hoping I could ask you about yours if you do not mind?” Delfina said.


        Dana gathered her thoughts for a moment, “well I’ve had a couple, and I thought they were alright. They ask me how I feel about certain subjects. I respond as close to the truth as I can. Some of the subjects are far too emotionally charged for me. They asked about Phoenix Station and the research I did there.”


        “Really? Did you tell them?” Delfina asked, not attempting to hide her surprise.


        “No. They never wanted to know. They just asked how I felt about it.”


        Delfina mused for a moment. “I cannot imagine why they would ask that.”


        “Me neither.” Dana agreed. “So how was your evaluation?”


        Delfina did not immediately respond, instead she drew her gaze towards their toes and used her toes to rise above Dana’s and grab onto them.
        “Did you know that the analyst performing the evaluation has a heads up display?” Delfina asked, still not looking at Dana.


        “You mean Derick? I did not notice.” Dana said.


        “They do. I noticed it right before the end of my session. I am fairly certain Derick is not the one actually conducting the evaluation. He is merely a friendly face for whoever truly is.” Delfina said.


        “Why do you think this is?” Dana asked.


        “I remain uncertain.” Delfina said, becoming increasingly lost in thought.


        “I think it would be best if we ate something. Harold, Priya and Mateus are all waiting in the mess hall.” Dana said with a smile.


        Delfina suddenly became alert and turned to Dana saying, “I don’t trust them.”


        Dana’s eyebrows rose. “What? Why?”


        “I have been thinking. Thinking about rehabilitation and my conversation with Lieutenant Siskind and everything about our time here. I feel… eternally grateful to have found you here.” Delfina said, noticing Dana’s cheeks blush a little. “But everything else, the Alpha Empire may have done many wrong things, but I do not believe that makes the ISI this benevolent entity they pretend to be. I like these new feelings I have been experiencing. These feelings with you especially. They make me feel alive. Like a human. But everything else, everywhere I turn, it makes me uneasy. The psych evaluations. The unnatural friendliness of the crew. I feel that the goal of ‘rehabilitation’ they are trying to accomplish is not their true motive. The only one here I trust besides you is Lieutenant Siskind.” 


        Dana took a deep breath, processing everything Delfina just said. “Delfina, you are really starting to worry me. I’ve tried not to say anything, but I see growing evidence that you finished the isolation stage with false intentions. And what do you mean you trust Siskind? The man is a murderer and was getting ready to strike you!”


        “He was?” Delfina asked, surprised.


        “Yes, his body language was starting to show his aggressiveness.” Dana said. “Priya gave me a few tips… but that doesn’t matter, why do you have any reason to trust him.” Dana added on with disgust.


        “Even if he was going to attack me, I think he was the only one being honest. Although he seemed strange initially, I sensed his convictions to be true.” Delfina said.


        “I sensed his convictions to be true.” Dana repeated mockingly, “what do you know of how to read anyone’s convictions?”


        Delfina recoiled away from Dana, “enough I hope. Your tone is making me feel uncomfortable.”


        “Learn how to deal with your emotions Delfina! You can’t let people hurt you so easily!” Dana said.


        “I’ve dealt with my emotions enough.” Delfina replied, “I’ve had to go through so much misery to even get here. You don’t even know the things I’ve seen.”


        “Don’t lecture me about misery. I lost everything on Phoenix Station too. You aren’t the only one who has suffered and continues to suffer.” Dana said.
        “Then why are you making me feel worse! Haven’t I gone through enough already?” Delfina said.
        
        “Because you are making yourself feel worse! Just accept that it’s over. The fighting, the lies, adapt to your new life!” Dana shouted.


        “Or what!” Delfina shouted back.


        “Or you’ll end up like Ethar!” Dana said with a tear rolling down her cheek. She got up and left their cabin.


        Delfina watched her leave from the bed, stunned. She couldn’t believe what had just transpired. Her heart ached at seeing Dana leave her. Yet she was still furious at her for disagreeing with her. In a fit of rage she slammed the wall with her fist and winced as it impacted with metal. Dana was right. She didn’t have control of her emotions. Especially now when tears began to form. She just gave in to them and wept. Never would she suspect someone she cared for so deeply would be so quick to hurt her.
        She lay in bed, long after the tears subsided, thinking about how to write things with Dana. But she wasn’t ready to confront her yet. Her stomach growled but she dared not go to the mess hall. Certainly Dana would be there with the ISI crewmembers. Delfina got up, wiped her eyes and exited the cabin.
        She had no destination in mind. She just wanted to walk around the ship. Be somewhere else for a moment. Feel something else most importantly. She walked past other former Alpha Imperials, they passed each other in silence, acknowledging each other with only a look. Some ISI crew members passed as well, they smiled widely and greeted her in passing. Somehow she preferred the silent exchange with the imperials instead of these all too welcoming ISI crew members.


        She stopped when she spotted a ladder on the side of the wall, connected to the levels above and below. Delfina glanced both ways to see if anyone was nearby. Satisfied that she was alone, she decided to take the ladder up, leaving the crew level. She had no idea if she was allowed to, but she cared little for what the ISI thought. 
        As soon as she completed her ascent, she started walking through one of the halls. These hallways were not quite as clean as the ones below. Nor were they as wide. Supplies were scattered haphazardly and the lighting was much poorer. Delfina walked carefully past several crates and gazed around her, looking for anything of interest. She heard heavy footfalls coming from around the corner and started backing up away from them. But she backed into a container of canisters and toppled to the ground, canisters rolling everywhere. As the footfalls came closer, she made out the face of none other than Lieutenant Siskind.
        
        “Alpha spy. I knew it.” Lieutenant Siskind said with a grin. “They tell me you are all harmless but here you are, snooping about.”


        Delfina stood up and brushed herself off. “I am not a spy.” she stated.


        Lieutenant Siskind furrowed his brow, taken aback by her nonchalant attitude. “Clearly you have no fear.” he said.


        “I do fear things. Not you however.” Delfina said, walking closer to him until they were looking at each other face to face. She noticed upon closer inspection that he carried some scars, covered up but not completely hidden. His face had stubble and his intense eyes were emerald. His armor was that of an ISI marine, and even though it had been recently polished, it bore the marks of combat. Indents from shrapnel scarred the front of his suit. One of the suit’s legs was bent slightly to the side, enough to be uncomfortable but not enough to cripple the user. She looked at his hair, rough and unattended, contrasting sharply with the rest of the crew.


        “You don’t fear me?” he said with equal parts admiration and irritation.


        “Do you fear me?” Delfina asked, looking up at him.


        “Of course not.” Lieutenant Siskind scoffed.


“Then why do you wear armor?” Delfina asked.


“Why do I wear— what are you trying to do here imperial?” Siskind accused.


“I am terrible at reading people apparently.” Delfina said.


“What a surprise coming from a damn robot.” Siskind smirked.


“But there are a few things I am very familiar with.” Delfina continued. “One of which is wearing a suit. Especially when you are already within a safe place.”


“That’s it. I’m taking you back to the crew deck. I’m under orders not to strangle you but I can’t promise anything if you keep trying to pry into my soul.” Siskind muttered, grabbing Delfina’s arm.


“I’m sorry. I just wanted to thank you.” Delfina said.


“Thank me?” Siskind said.


“For being honest, back in the mess hall. I appreciate you speaking your thoughts.” Delfina said.


“Someone’s got to tell you elves how fucked up you are. I never understood this whole thing about pretending to love each and every one of you.” Siskind said. 
“I heard you were the one that captured me.” Delfina said as Lieutenant Siskind led her back to the crew deck.


“That’s classified.” Lieutenant Siskind said.


“And you were probably on Phoenix Station, weren’t you.” Delfina said.


“Also classified.” Lieutenant Siskind said angrily.


“That place was my home for almost my entire life. I lost almost all of my friends there.” Delfina said.


        She noticed the Lieutenant was getting increasingly angry. But not at her, for as much as he gnashed his teeth and curled his lip, his hold on her remained gentle.


        They finally reached the ladder to the crew deck. “Through there. Now. And don’t let me see you back up here.” Lieutenant Siskind scowled.


As Delfina became to climb down she heard him just audibly say, “I lost more than just friends on there.” 


Delfina reached the bottom, disappointed that she had so little time to get information from Lieutenant Siskind. But she noted his internal pain was very real. There was no way he could fake his emotions as well as that. At least not that she knew. But at least it confirmed everything she had previously thought. This “Rehabilitator ship” and its crew were all specifically designed to create a wonderful illusion of the ISI.
        Delfina walked opposite of her quarters and soon found herself in one of the containment cells she initially woke up in. All of the projectors and lights were off, leaving it utterly dark. Delfina carefully stepped in, momentarily fearing that she would once more be trapped. But there was nothing here or in any of the other cells. She had been the last to finish “rehabilitation”.
        It felt strange to return here voluntarily. She sat in the seat that had immobilized her during her initial revelations by the ISI. She expected to feel another burst of sudden realization like previously. But even when she had her initial epiphany, everything was still ultimately confusing. Now, her confusion remained, as well as a great feeling of uncertainty. She desperately wanted to be like Dana, to look past everything the ISI was doing and to stop thinking about their motives. More than that, she wanted to be with Dana, the only person she trusted. The only person left from her old life. 
        But how could she react to the brutal betrayal by the Alpha Empire by instilling all her trust in the ISI? It made no logical sense. Nothing prevented the ISI from betraying them as well. They might be better than the Alpha Empire, but Delfina was beginning to wonder how much better.


        “Delfina?” it was Dana’s voice, from the entrance to the cell.


        “Dana.” Delfina sat up instantly, happy to let Dana’s voice cleave through her troubling thoughts.


        “I’ve been looking for you. You worried me.” Dana said.


        “I’ve been thinking on the best way to apologize to you.” Delfina said.


        “I, I have to say a couple of words first.” Dana said. She took a deep breath. “Delfina. For the first time, I no longer feel like a drone. I feel the way I am supposed to feel. Everything that I have experienced this past month is better than the entirety of my life leading up to it. I am no longer an analyst for Project Enigma. I no longer devote my life to the Alpha Empire. Now, I am just Dana. And I live my life that way, with no other considerations in mind. Do the goals of the ISI really change anything? Do you suspect an ulterior motive really worth worrying about? I am finished with factional alignments and war. My biggest priority is to get on a planet, and live a life that everyone here describes as ‘normal.’ And… I’d like that life to be with you.”


        Delfina carefully prepared what she would say next. They had shared so much of their lives together and yet they looked at the world in such different ways. At another time she may have thought this was fascinating. But now it made her despondent. For whatever Delfina decided to do, Dana would not be a part of it. Not until Delfina truly understood what was going on in this ship. She stared at Dana’s stump and wondered how she could not fear the very same thing that caused her so much pain. Delfina was certain of her feelings for her, and knew that finding out what the ISI had in store for them would maximize their chances of salvaging their lives together.


        “Dana, you are all that I have left. I will do whatever I have to as long as that means I can be with you. You are the only thing I care about in this entire galaxy. I… I will try to work on my emotions, and fears, and I will try to adapt like you asked.” Delfina said.


        “And I’m sorry for being so frustrated with you. To be honest, I haven’t mastered how to feel yet either. All of this is new for me too, not as new as for you, but still something I am not used to.” Dana said.


        Delfina’s stomach rumbled, and Dana smiled a bit.


        “Let’s go get dinner.” Dana said.


        “I thought you already ate?” Delfina asked.


        “I couldn’t, not without you,” Dana said, taking Delfina’s hand in her one good hand.


***


        More fruitless psych evaluations followed. More disconcerting thoughts. More studying of their captors while they studied her.


        What changed was the information exchange to Dana. They still slept in the same bunk if for anything other than physical contact. But other than that Delfina could feel an invisible void breaking the powerful feelings that they shared. This distressed her. She attempted briefly to forget about all the things about rehabilitation that vexed her mind, but she could not. Dana wanted nothing but to live without worry or fear. Dana seemed either ignorant or willfully oblivious to their growing disconnect.
        Delfina wanted the same thing as Dana. A peaceful life. It was just... difficult to ignore all the potential threats around her. The ISI may not be an enemy but it was also no friend. Nothing they have done yet conveyed any sense of security to Delfina. Her brief exchanges with Lieutenant Siskind did not help either.
        
***
        “Dana, I have noticed that our relationship has altered in a way that is not advantageous.” Delfina said when they were both lying in bed. 


        Dana turned to face her, but remained on the other side.


        “I have noticed as well.” Dana said distantly.


        Delfina took a deep breath. “I believe it to be in my nature to know the exact cause of everything I can possibly know. It is what led me to be trained as a researcher and what helped promote me so quickly. I have looked at this characteristic as a gift. The sheer drive it provides has helped me overcome a myriad of problems. Recently however, I view it as a curse. It leads to my discontent with our current situation and it leads me to question everything, including you. I do not wish to do this, but I cannot help it. What I can do is making sure every moment I spend with you now atones for the years I spent without you. Dana, I wish to close this void between us. I cannot stand the thought of losing our intimacy which I value above all else.”


        Delfina could see a tear slide down Dana’s cheek. “I wish it were that easy.” she said.


        “Are you unwilling?” Delfina asked, concern flooding her face.


        “No. I am willing. But, I am worried. Worried about you Delfina. The closer I get to you, the more I fear you will wind up like Ethar. For you to end up like he did… Delfina, I could never go through that. I fear that would end me. I need you to adapt.”


        “I will adapt Dana.” Delfina said. “For you. No matter where we are taken. I will not succumb to my fears. I promise you that.”


        After an unsure second, both of them embraced.


        After what felt simultaneously like an eternity and nanosecond, they let go of each other.


        “Dana, help me ease my fears. Help me destroy my doubt about our chances of actually living after we get off this ship. Please.” Delfina said.


        “What can I do?” Dana said.


        “Tomorrow, when we wake and go to eat breakfast with the others, I need you to ask them some questions. Their reactions will tell me everything. Either you will understand my worries, or hopefully, I will get rid of mine.”
***


        “Hey there.” Priya said as Delfina and Dana sat down, “I just realized I never saw one of you without the other.”


        “We are hard to separate after so many years of working together.” Dana said. Delfina just smiled politely.


        “In my experience, the longer I work with someone, the less I want to spend time with them.” Priya said, glancing at Harold.


        “You are as subtle as a tornado. I think even Mateus caught that.” Harold said.


        Mateus said nothing. He just used his spork to stir the food in front of him, oblivious to the current conversation, withdrawn from the world.


        “So Harold, Priya.” Dana said leaning in, “how did you get assigned to this ship?” Delfina eyed both of them, analyzing every movement.


        Both Harold and Priya froze, looking at each other. Harold scratched his head, “it really isn’t that interesting of a story in all honesty. It just kind of… happened.”


        Dana looked at Delfina in a look that yelled this doesn’t prove anything.


        “It was just like anyone else really. I signed up, went through training and got randomly assigned here.” Priya said.


        “And you did not receive any extra training to be on a vessel with such a… dedicated mission?” Dana asked.


        “Apart from treat the newcomers with respect, not really.” Priya said.


        “Yeah, we are supposed to refrain from our asshole tendencies, something Blazek obviously did not understand.” Harold added.


        Mateus suddenly looked up and around the table. “The energy in this conversation has changed…” he whispered. “Harold, Priya, do you think the room is too hot?”


        Delfina brought her fingers to her chin, watching the beads of sweat forming on Priya and Harold.


        Both Harold and Priya’s wrist displays beeped. “We have been called back to our stations.” they said.


        “Convenient.” Delfina said.


        Harold’s eyes grew pleading, “do you not believe us?”


        Another beep came but this time their holodisplays activated. Large swathes of data quickly displayed before their eyes.


        “Oh fuck.” Priya said.


        Both of them ran out of the mess hall without any further words. The rest of the crew on the ship followed suit. Only the rehabilitated remained in the mess hall, confused by the sudden exit of all the ISI.


        A ship wide communication channel opened, and the captain’s voice echoed from every corner of the mess hall. Delfina subconsciously grabbed Dana’s hand.


        “This is Captain Lasky speaking. An unforeseen situation is occurring and I ask all non-military personnel to head to their cabins and wait there. A hostile warship is approaching.”


        ***
        Delfina and Dana sat on the bunk, listening intently for any noises indicative of what was going on.


        “Warship? We left Alpha Empire space weeks ago. Belusia was on fringe territory. How is this possible?” Delfina said.


        Dana said nothing but Delfina knew she echoed the same thoughts. If it was a warship and this warranted such a response, it was obviously not friendly. From the areas Delfina was allowed to see, she gathered that the ship was not large. Perhaps it was a frigate or even as small as a corvette. That, and the fact that air and gravity were still present meant any breaches in the hull would be disastrous, even with the ship’s bulkheads. It was clearly not designed for war. Against her better judgement, Delfina began running probability analysis in her head of successful engagement situations with the enemy ship. She did not like the number that came up.


        “This is why I was not worried before Delfina.” Dana scowled. “So many miserable events keep happening and yet you manage to turn our time aboard this ship into one of them. Now is when you should worry. Not before.”


        Delfina felt Dana’s words like a cut on her heart. She had underestimated how deeply mere words could affect her entire temperament. She thought she had sealed the void with Dana and caused all their issues to go away. Why was Dana using now as a time to attack her?


        “I believe we will have time to discuss that after we are through with this event. I do not think it wise to discuss our issues now.” Delfina said.


        Dana grew visibly irritated. “Why are you so disconnected right now. Are you refusing to face that neither of us has gotten anything out of our last agreement except more sadness.”


        Delfina stopped looking around the stateroom and looked at Dana, grabbing her hand with both her own hands. “I meant every word I said about facing my doubts together with you and adapting. But if the very real possibility occurs here that we die, I do not want our last words to be ones of discontent. I love you Dana. I am not entirely sure what that word means yet, but from what I understand, it describes my feelings towards you. All I want is to survive this with you.”


        Dana nodded, swallowing her rage and taking deep breaths. “I’m scared.” she said.


        “Me too.” Delfina said.
        
        The captain’s voice came on again.“All crew and non-military personnel, we are being boarded. Please do not open fire. I repeat, you are to stand down. Do not attack the boarding personnel.”


        “I’m not sure if this is good or bad.” Delfina said.


        Both their eyes widened in surprise as the captain said the rest of the message.


        “New member Delfina. You are to stand by, Lieutenant Blazek is going to take you to the bridge.”


        “Bad.” Dana said. “Definitely bad.”
        














Chapter 13: Elyisium


        Brilliant purple crystals dotted the horizon on the planet Elisium. Above the kilometer high crystals were clouds of ash, blocking most light from Elisium’s distant star. A nearby volcano contributed to the ash, spewing forth thick, black clouds of the substance. From the sides of the volcano came streams of magma, flowing between obsidian canyons into a massive lake of glowing lava that surrounded the volcano on all sides and cast an eerie orange shade onto it.
On the far side of the lava lake, opposite the volcano, multi legged creatures scurried on the dark plains, feasting on microorganisms that thrived around mineral deposits. The mineral deposits themselves acted as the oases on this planet: all wildlife depended on them directly or indirectly for turning minerals into energy. These mineral deposits were easily spotted by the plethora of bioluminescent plants that surrounded them. Some of the plants had thick glowing pods on their undersides, forming a home for symbiotic organisms. Other plants formed like vines, spreading out to cover a large surface area. None of them had leaves. The lack of sun made photosynthesis impossible.
Far away from the volcano and the dark plains were Elisium’s forests. The “trees” were plants that appeared as large spires reaching out into the sky. They had an almost rocky appearance. Their sole purpose was to extract any sort of minerals in the air that were constantly being shot out of the thousands of active volcanos.
Between these tree-spires hovered a train, traveling at several hundred kilometers per hour along a magnetized track. The magnets both powered the train and managed to repel the constantly falling ash, thus keeping the tracks unobstructed. 
        ***
        “Beautiful isn’t it?” said Count Lapsus. He continued to stare at the desolate landscape. Lava flares jumped hundred of meters into the air from the distant lava lake. Ash continued its eternal descent.


        Delfina sat in an extravagantly crafted seat on the train. It was covered in a plush, ultrasoft material colored the same purple as the gigantic crystals in the distance. The interior of the cylindrical train had carefully etched golden patterns. She pondered briefly what confused her more, the seemingly pointless waste of resources on decorating this train, or the Count himself.
        She had met him back on the rehabilitation ship and had been instructed to go with him. Not long after he revealed why.
        He struck her as a complete enigma. He walked around with gallantry and a cape. He had a distinctive short beard that tapered off like a triangle and was maintained with laser precision. The rest of his hair was also very well kept and combed in a wave-like pattern that must have required a specialist to arrange. His clothing was just as ornate, made of dark leather with a large purple and gold insignia in the center. On his side he carried an ancient sword whose handle gleamed with polish.


        “So how much are they paying you?” Delfina asked.
        
        “Fifty thousand kilograms of platinum, fifty thousand kilograms of palladium and fifty thousand kilograms of osmium. Amazing is it not? All refined and ready for use! What a deal my dear. What a deal.” Count Lapsus said with excitement.


He turned away from the view to Delfina with a smile. “I do apologize for my fixation on the countryside. Due to recent events I have not seen the outside in a little bit over a week. It makes you realize how much you miss seeing the outdoors.”


Delfina looked at the fiery landscape and blankly back at him. He carefully slid off his large gloves and sat next to Delfina, extending his hand.


“And now for formal introductions, as your captain has told you — I am Count Lapsus of the Elisium Consolidation.”


        Delfina hesitantly took his hand and shook it, the concept of handshaking still felt foreign to her. “I am Delfina.” she said.


        “Yes, yes. Delfina. The glorious researcher. Head researcher actually. You are just spectacular. Absolutely so! You cannot understand how delighted I am that you are in my company! Oh yes!” the Count rambled.


        “I no longer hold the title of head researcher anymore.” Delfina said bluntly.


        “Oh but you might change your mind on that! Say, would you like some refreshments? Are you hungry at all. I have many selections of wine and the best vat grown steak in the galaxy… as far as I know!” the Count chuckled.


        “I would like some water to drink,” Delfina said dryly.


        “Of course. How could I be so ignorant. You Alpha boys and girls have never seen a bottle of wine or slice of steak in your lives.Well don’t feel bad. Most of your ISI friends haven’t either.”


        “I don’t belong to the Alpha Empire nor is the ISI my friend.” Delfina said coldly while taking a wineglass filled with water. 


        “Well then! Seems like you have a bit of an identity crisis there.” the Count said wryly while stroking his beard. “Luckily for you we have around forty-eight hours for you to solve your little dilemma.”
 
        “Forty-eight hours?” Delfina asked before sipping from her glass.


        “Forty-eight! Of course! The amount of time before your Alpha buddies come and take you back. Also the amount of time before I get all that glorious metal.”


        “That seems like a very short time. We are on the distant edge of Alpha Empire space. It should take them longer than that.” Delfina reasoned.


        “A fair point you make. Most fair. Except they already have a fleet positioned in close proximity. They really want you back. Not to mention, I’m sure the fine folks of the ISI sent a distress signal of their own.” Count Lapsus said. “No telling when they will get here.”


        Delfina sighed and looked out the window. The train no longer passed alongside tree-spires, instead, now it circled around one of the massive purple crystals that dwarfed even a cruiser, the largest ship she had ever seen. She stared at the crystalline mass, so bright and flawless against the darkness of the planet. All her thoughts focused on Dana. The emotionally charged moment before she had to leave and seeing the look of despair fall across her eyes as Delfina left the ship.


        “Now I know that look. That is not the look of someone enjoying paradise. That is the look of someone who misses it.” Count Lapsus said. “Did you lose someone close to you?”


        “Because of you, yes.” Delfina said bitterly.


        “Because of me?” the Count said with an air of incredulousness. “I have taken no one and nothing away from you except these next forty-eight hours. So you better enjoy them.”


        “Enjoy them?” Delfina laughed sarcastically, “where? From a holding cell?”


        “On the contrary,” the Count grinned, “I am going to take you on a tour. We started it when we touched down on this planet actually. This is the first part, traveling through the lush countryside.”


        Delfina’s brow furrowed as she tried to analyze the Count’s intentions. She looked at him and his casual demeanor and smile.


        “Do your people know you have gone insane?” Delfina asked openly.


        “They have not a clue.” the Count smiled back. “But look at it this way, sometimes the only sane person is the insane.”


        “If you continue to speak without meaning, I will stop listening to you.” Delfina said.


        “You think what I say is rubbish? Well everyone is entitled to their own opinions of course. But while I do have your attention, I would like you to direct your attention outside, to the first circle of paradise.” the Count stated.


        Delfina did look outside and to her surprise saw human settlements. But the structures all appeared constructed out of spare materials and metal scraps. The settlements were spaced far apart and looked to contain no more than a hundred people in each. Many had fires raging at their centers.


        “What are these, scavengers?” Delfina asked with a hint of disgust.


        “Scavengers, lawless, vagrants. Whatever you want to call them.” the Count explained.


        “How can you tolerate this? Either relocate them to productive positions or dispose of them. Why let them stay here like this?” Delfina questioned.


        “Because they choose to.” Count Lapsus said. “I will not have them do something they do not want to do. If I relocate them they will only cause trouble for the rest of the people. And if I kill them, well what kind of a ruler am I that exterminates his own populace? That would be a terrible paradise.”


        “But this looks nothing like paradise. The planet is terribly suited for habitation and these people seem to live in anything but paradise!” Delfina exclaimed.


        “You say that, and you aren’t the only one with that opinion, I assure you! But, you say that and I say this, have you ever pondered as to what paradise looks like? If you do figure it out, I am willing to bet all one hundred and fifty thousand kilograms of my soon to be precious metals that it differs from everyone else's.”
        “For these ‘scavengers’ here, this is paradise.” the Count said, pointing to crude vehicles with all sorts of sloppily welded additions that attempted to keep pace with the train. Delfina watched the drivers in open cockpits waving their arms wildly in the air as they used hills to fly into the air alongside the train.


        “The ability to truly live without any rules is what they hold most precious. Even their quality of life is second to a lawless life. It is just how some of us humans are.” the Count suggested. “And here! Here is the second circle of paradise!”


        Delfina felt the tiniest of tremors as the train gracefully slowed down. She looked outside and saw a massive fortified wall growing larger as they approached. She could just barely glimpse a few guards overlooking it.


        The train completely stopped and Delfina stood along with Count Lapsus. Six members of the Count’s honor guard took position alongside them and the train doors opened. A man with an even wider grin than the Count stood waiting.


        “Welcome to paradise!” he beamed.
***


        Delfina awkwardly fumbled with the knife in her hand, struggling to keep her fork embedded in her steak while cutting cleanly through with the knife. Even though her discomfort was obvious and slightly embarrassing, no one at the table mentioned it.
        Around her sat as many as a hundred high level administrators and their aides. The table they feasted off was massive, and unlike every single piece of furniture she had ever seen, the table was constructed out of lacquered wood. It was covered in plates loaded with impossibly many different types of food.
        As the many diners piled on their plates, they exchanged stories and broke out in raucous laughter amongst themselves. Delfina could not tell who the administrators were and who the aides were, it seemed all ideas of rank were forgotten here. Also, she noticed that the diners who favored drinking wine became increasingly rowdy. The drink appeared to have a special quality about it.
        The dining hall was on the highest floor in the Count’s citadel, towering above the capital city of Elisium. All four walls were fully translucent, providing an unparalleled view of the city and the volcanic plains beyond its walls.


        “Nothing like a good feast is there?” the Count leaned towards Delfina and chuckled.


        “I do not understand how everyone here is so at ease. Is no one aware of the war going on?” Delfina whispered to the Count.


        “Everyone!” the Count yelled, waiting for them to focus on him. “Our wonderful guest of honor has just asked me if any of you are aware that there is a war going on!”


        Everyone at the table burst into a massive fit of laughter. Some pounded their fists on the table they were laughing so hard, causing all the plates to shake.


        “Of course they are aware.” the Count said to Delfina. “They came here to escape it. ISI, Alpha, and everyone in between. This is paradise.”


        “And you do not fear that the war will come here?” Delfina astoundedly asked.


        “Because of you... it will.” the Count said in an unusually serious tone.


***
        “So what do you think of the ISI?” the Count asked.
        Both of them were still in the dining hall of the Count’s citadel. All the guests had left and a handful of drones were silently collecting plates and cleaning. The view from all four walls remained the same: dark ash falling everywhere with a volcano billowing in the background and purple crystals brilliantly reflecting lakes of lava. Delfina stood by one of the translucent walls, the Count remained sitting across from her. 


        “I distrust them. They seem deceptive of their true intentions.” Delfina said.


        “Oh they are.” the Count said. “But then again, from my experience — everyone is fundamentally deceptive.”


        “Are you being deceptive right now?” Delfina asked, turning to the Count and sitting down across from him.


        “Now that would be telling.” the Count smirked. “But know this, I have been around too long and endured too many lies to treat deception the same way everyone else does.”


        “So you are being deceptive.” Delfina said uncertainly.


        “It’s whatever you make of it. Don’t trouble yourself with pointless mind games now, let me continue my tour of the city.” the Count replied.
***
        The capital city of Elisium consisted of a couple hundred gigantic structures all interconnected by tubes. The air outside was not breathable and far too hot to survive without appropriate equipment. The tube system ensured that no one would have to continuously suit up and deal with the harsh conditions outside.
        Delfina followed the Count into the lower reaches of the Citadel. She noticed very few people passing by and that the Count’s honor guard were not in the vicinity. She wondered if the Count felt safe — or cared.
        They entered through a passage into what reminded Delfina of the command center on Phoenix Station, but smaller. Much smaller. A handful of the people Delfina had seen at the dinner sat in front of consoles or spoke with one another.
        “These are the administrators.” said Count Lapsus. “Like myself, they enjoy leading people and the responsibility it brings. They maintain the entirety of this city.”
        The view of the administrators quietly ensuring that the city keeps functioning was the first sight on this planet that seemed familiar to Delfina. Finally a view of people ensuring they would survive. Everything else on Elisium so far felt more alien than even the ISI. The ISI was inefficient. But this planet? It wholly did not care about efficiency it seemed.
***
        Count Lapsus proceeded to show Delfina the barracks which suited the people who like to fight. He showed the gates that allowed people to either go and become outlaws or offer sanctum to those who wished to return to civilized life. He showed the medical facilities where babies were grown and he pointed out their many caretakers that loved working with children. Everywhere they went, their were very few people in between. The entirety of the city felt completely empty, especially for its massive size. Presently, Count Lapsus was taking her through one of the connection tubes to what he claimed was the last stop of the tour.
        
They walked through a passageway into the structure and Delfina gasped. In front of her were arranged thousands of pods reminiscent of the stasis pods she had used herself. To her shock, every single one was full. There were countless stacks of them, lining the entirety of the massive hollow structure.
        
        “What… what is this place Lapsus?” Delfina stammered.


        “Where ninety-nine percent of the population lives. The third circle of paradise. All around us are individuals living in fully immersive virtual reality.” Count Lapsus proclaimed. “Each one of them lives in a world tailored specifically to their individual wants. Some are heroes in their world. Some live a life of luxury. Some live in solitude with the most tranquil scenes available in the entire universe. Some of them are gods.”


        “Virtual reality… I thought it was banned?” Delfina said.


        “In the ISI and Alpha Empires sure, as it well should be. It only has a place in paradise.” the Count said.


        “What is the point of this tour? The point of you bringing me here at all?” Delfina asked.


        “Do you not see?” Count Lapsus said. “I have created as close to a paradise as I possibly could. Everyone does what they want to do. Everyone is happy here, content. Virtual reality provides the most perfect experience possible. For the few that don’t like it they become warriors, or administrators. They play with children and teach them or become vicious animals outside these walls. In this place, there is no greed. There is no struggle unless you want one. Everyone lives here as they want.”


        “Paradise.” Delfina said.


        “Admittedly, the surroundings seem like a caricature of Hell itself. But where some see disharmony I see beauty. The planet is too inhospitable to make for a good base, not to mention it lies at the far reaches of both ISI and Alpha Empire space. The only redeeming quality about this planet is its high mineral yield, but the density of the planet makes taking any of it offworld prohibitively expensive. That and mining it is a pain in the ass. So you see, this is paradise. The only one I could actually create.


        “I do not mean to be rude, as I learn more I realize I may come off that way more often than I would like, but I still need to know. Why are you showing me all this?” Delfina questioned.


        “Because the Alpha Empire has not put a bounty on anyone in at least a hundred years, maybe two hundred even. You are one of the few who not only see both parts of the spectrum, but also have the power to do something about it. I have been in this universe for many many years. Looking back now, I should have died a long time ago. I suppose I did. Huh.” the Count mused.


        “You say I am so important. That I have so much power. What can I do? What possible difference can I make?” Delfina asked.


        “Being completely honest I’m not sure. I am just giving you the tools to ensure you have the possibility to. Everything you know about this war between the ISI and Alpha Empire is much more volatile than you think. The ISI can be much more inhuman than you can imagine and the Alpha Empire much more resourceful than ever expected. I’ve been out of the loop for a long time but I have my spies within the ISI. And I know the Alpha Empire is planning something big. The ISI may look like it’s winning, but they don’t understand the Alpha Empire. These buffer colonies they keep losing mean nothing to the Alpha Empire.”
        
The Count paused and grabbed both Delfina’s hands in his and looked down into her eyes.


“When the Alpha Empire and ISI come, I’m letting you choose which one you go with.”


















Chapter 14: Appeal


        Paradise.


        What an odd description for this world. A world of flaming infernos and volcanic chasms. A place where a suitless person would burn, suffocate or both in less than a minute. The skies were perpetually darkened under massive clouds of ash. The only real light on this planet came from the pools of lava that slowly bubbled and spilled around the wasteland. Red. The clouds, the volcanos, the plains. All red from the lava. 
        Outside the walls were those who opted for a life using the scraps of civilization. Vicious, hardened individuals that grouped together and committed atrocities against one another. No doubt the whole of them were psychopathic. A fitting place the fiery wastelands were for them.


        Delfina lay bare beside a massive window in her temporary residence. Every day she felt as if her previous self was mentally shackled. The first time she felt this was at the hands of the ISI when they revealed the Alpha Empire’s indoctrination. The second, when she felt an emotional connection with Dana that she never experienced before. And the third, on this planet, seeing the seemingly senseless Count convey an outside perspective. Everytime she felt as if a massive piece of the universe had been revealed. She could not imagine returning to her previous state of ignorance at the hands of the Alpha Empire.
        She was a pawn. Had been and still was. Even her line of thinking: ISI or Alpha Empire. As if those were the only two options on how she could spend her life. She had mused if there was a third way. A way that fell outside the schemes of the antagonistic superpowers. The longer she thought about them, the less she understood why they fought. She had firsthand seen the carnage that the constant military campaigns wrought.
        Now, more than ever, it became painfully obvious that information was a scarce commodity. No one in her past had given it freely and she was absolutely sure that even Count Lapsus himself hid many things from her, even with his supposed generosity. He saw that she was exposed to both sides. To see beyond the scope of a single faction. That much was true. What Delfina had experienced thus far made her want to do nothing but leave this sector of space and into another, desolate, uninhabited one.
        Even as a researcher her information during her work for the Alpha Empire was severely limited unless she needed it. Her thoughts turned towards the galaxy she lived in and how little she knew about it. These were thoughts that never came to mind when fighting a faction for your own. But now she had no faction to fight for. She believed in none of them. Instead of focusing on how to win, for the first time she thought about what “winning” entailed. How many centuries had the two factions been in conflict?


        Delfina stared out into the city. The way Count Lapsus described the entirety of Elisium was that everyone did exactly what they wanted to do. The lawless raided each other. The disciplined stood watch. The administrators controlled. Everyone else just lived out their fantasies in simulators.
        Were those the only things she could do with her life? Did everyone so neatly segment into those categories? It seemed highly impractical. Surely there must be other things. Something not so… pointless. She rose from the window and slipped into a jumpsuit.
***
        Delfina crossed through one of interconnected tubes from the Citadel into a simulation tower. When the final door slid open she entered the massive structure for a second time. She found herself on a catwalk surrounded by pods with people in them, their faces lightly illuminated by  blue diagnostic readouts of the inhabitants vitals.
        When Delfina walked, her feet stepping on the metal created the only noise in the entirety of the skyscraper, echoing many times throughout. She shuddered. Gusts of icy air raced past her from the silent cooling vents, keeping all the simulation databanks cool and operating at peak efficiency.
        She carefully approached a pod. Apprehension coursed through her as she looked at the young woman inside. Small numbers hovered over the woman’s face: vital signs. They casted an eerie blue glow on her features. The woman did not move. Her eyelids were shut and static. Her mouth and nose were hidden behind a breathing apparatus. Delfina struggled to see any signs of life.


        “So you disapprove?” came Count Lapsus’ deep voice from behind her.


        Delfina turned instantly with her hands out in front of her in a combat stance. Count Lapsus raised an eyebrow and a slight grin escaped him.


        “You scared me.” Delfina said, her tone as frigid as the air. She lowered her arms slowly.


        “I can see that.” laughed Count Lapsus. “I had a feeling you would not sleep.”


        Delfina rubbed her forehead. “Constantly I am besieged by choices that I have to make. I have no way of knowing which ones are right, which ones are wrong. You present me with yet another one. Why? Why all this constant choosing? I am sick of it. It upsets my stomach. It robs me of my sleep. It causes my head head to ache.”


        The Count nonchalantly leaned against a railing on the catwalk and took a deep breath.


        “What choices have you been faced with so far Delfina?” he asked.


        “My occupation within the Alpha Empire.” Delfina said.


        “That was no choice. Your occupation is determined by your proficiency based on tests administered while you are a child.” the Count stated bluntly.


        “What? How do you think you know that?” Delfina asked, her face instantly flushed red.


        “I told you I have been around for quite some time.” Count Lapsus replied.
        
“That tells me nothing.” Delfina said.


        “If you haven’t figured it out yet, I’d rather not delve deeper into that subject. Tell me what other choices you have had to make.”


        Delfina composed herself saying, “Joining the ISI.”


        “Yet another illusion.” Count Lapsus said.


        “No. It was a clear choice. I could join or they would let me leave.” Delfina said defiantly.


        “Oh really?”


        “Really.” Delfina hissed. She leaned back a bit after she realized how emotionally she was defending the subject.


        “So you still don’t know why the ISI have these massive rehabilitation programs?” the Count asked.


        “I do. Because they value human life and attempt to rehabilitate us so that we may live a fulfilling life.” Delfina stated.


        “Because the ISI are such benevolent benefactors?” the Count suggested.


        “You can say so. What are you getting at?” Delfina said.


        Count Lapsus crossed his arms. “You have told me previously that you wish to know the truth. That you tire of constant deceit. Am I right?”


        “Well, I feel that I have been trapped by it my whole life.” Delfina said.


        “So here you go. ‘The ISI’ is not some massive unified entity. There is no unified philosophy that binds all its citizens. From what I know, the ISI has a massive spy problem. Absolutely massive. Spies, infiltrators, saboteurs. Most sent by the Alpha Empire and highly trained. These ‘rehabilitation’ sessions you have been going through? They do not care about you. All they want is to find out how your mind works. How they can use your way of thinking against the Alpha Empire. It helps them identify spies and predict battlefield decisions of enemy commanders. That’s it. That’s the reason. This ‘choice’ that you had was either submit to their constant delving into your mind or death.”


        “No that’s not right. They said if I did not want to join the ISI I would be left on my own.” Delfina stammered.
        
        “Because they would just leave a tactical asset alone… No. You either submit or you die. That isn’t much of a choice.” Lapsus said.


        “Stop. That cannot be true. They... they cared!” Delfina said.


        “Really? Were you not the one who found the actions of the crew suspicious... the psych evaluations as interrogations? The ISI has invested massive amounts of capital into this program. There was never any chance of being integrated. They just dump you on a moon and interrogate you until they know every little detail about you. ”


        “You lie.” Delfina said.


        “How many times are you going to go through the same process? How many times must you distrust everything you hear only to embrace it as the truth? Learn to keep an open mind. That is the only thing that will save you. Break free of this cycle where everyone indoctrinates you and see the galaxy for what it is!” yelled Lapsus.


        “Than what is it? What is the galaxy really?” Delfina yelled back.


        The Count smiled.


        “One gigantic, monumental human clusterfuck.”


        Delfina grimaced. “You are the one who does not see clearly. Clearly you have lost all hope you pessimistic fraud! Hiding on this backwater as if living like this—” she pointed to the pod with the young woman inside, “as if sealing yourself in this mindless contraption is any better!”


“I told you before. I’ll tell you again. These people came here to escape. You thought they came here to escape the war. But no, they come here to escape the rest of the galaxy. I have seen death and carnage like you would not believe. I have traveled to the edges of known space and found people so twisted it churns my stomach. I have watched by as humanity tore into itself because that’s what we were created to do. We should never have left our home planet.”


“Home planet?” Delfina repeated, listening to her words echo.


“Do you not even know where we came from?” the Count mused.


“Why would I know or care where the people of Elisium came from?” Delfina said.


        “NO! Not the people of Elisium. All people. Humans. Everyone.” Count Lapsus said, his voice resounding throughout the massive structure.


        Delfina stared speechless.


        “Damn it!” Count Lapsus yelled, turning away. “How can you know where we are going if you don’t even know where we came from? The indoctrination. The propaganda. This is why I need you! To put a stop to it. To keep humanity advancing. I need you to atone for me.”


        Delfina sat against the rail and stared blankly in front of herself. The Count was unraveling. And with that came far more information than she could process.


        The Count gripped the rail of the catwalk as tightly as he could. His leather gloves squeaked, the noise echoing in the otherwise silent room. Delfina switched her perspective to focus on him, noting his eyes were tightly shut. He continued gripping the rail with all his might until he finally let go with a deep breath.He turned to her and put on a pleasant smile.


        “There is not much time left Delfina. Not much at all before your friends arrive! I think you are due a brief history lesson!”
















Chapter 15: Revelations
  
        Many many years ago humanity arose on a planet called Earth. A lot of the details have been lost, but I’ll try to give you the best picture that I can. As far as we know, Earth is the oldest human world and the site of all human-compatible life. The people of Earth had many nations that constantly arose and collapsed for all sorts of reasons. Eventually, we know that humanity made it into space, and around three hundred years later, began colonizing in earnest.
        Before that time period, things are a little hazy, I’ll explain why later. But know that the ‘Solar System’ as it was called had eight planets. All of them were slowly colonized from the point humans invented space travel. But then came the ability to phase. After a massive amount of time spent researching the physics of the universe, particularly those involving black holes, the phase drive arose and allowed humanity to leave the Solar System.
        Normally this would be a fantastic achievement, truly. But humanity somehow maintained distinct countries and nations that mistrusted each other and occasionally warred with each other. A true waste if you ask me. Humanity never agreed with itself. Through the millennia of its existence, the concept of self and concept of community were never reconciled together. Some believed everything should be done for the “good of mankind” or something noble of that sort. The fastest rebuttal usually resulted in calling humans mere drones if all they did was for the community. Yet, centering the self never resulted in much good either. 
When humanity left for the stars, colonizing system after system and beginning a transformation of the Milky Way, the strength of greed, fear and power followed. A world provisional government had been formed to oversee the colonization, and to ensure that humanity left its worst traits on Earth. And this idealistic institution worked… for a time. Having new horizons made most people finally realize that conflict on Earth or even the Solar System was pointless when millions of worlds lay with untapped riches. Those who opposed leaving Earth stayed, and were soon forgotten by the many more who left humanity’s dwindling home. 
But how could peace have lasted if the very same people that insisted on having countries and borders and armies in the name of peace? No, there was no conceivable way. Just because people became more spread out and exposed to the dangers of space, and there were many dangers, did not mean that they could become these idealistic explorers everyone wished for them to be. Colonists quickly expanded outside the rule of any power other than nature. Thousands of planets were colonized in a century, tens of thousands in the following one. And each one had people. And each person had his or her own agenda. 
Colonies fell fate to lack of resources, damaged ships, psychopathic leaders or even computer miscalculations. Pirates and marauders became a very real threat. Of the thousands of colonized worlds, dozens were left completely lifeless within a year of their founding. Sometimes religious zealots would try to overtake a colony. Or a band of criminals. During the early years of space travel, before major refinements to phase travel, colonies lay years apart. They lay completely alone and vulnerable to the very people that formed them.


Present day stories of the past lay convoluted by decades of propaganda and records that nobody thought apt to keep. The basics are well known, a great colonization, followed by a destabilization and finally a more permanent reformation. When the more prosperous colonies realized that they were on their own, and saw how lawless the galaxy truly was, they decided to expand. The two modern, most successful hegemonies, are the Inter Systems Initiative and the Alpha Empire. The other colonies were either overtaken by the two giants or, far more likely, still functioning independently. The galaxy was a tremendously massive place and even still humanity had yet to explore a single spiral of the Milky Way. Plenty of places to avert notice. Notice that was very easy to avert given the total war the ISI and Alpha Empire seemed destined to wage.


Now the Initiative and the Alpha Empire started out a bit differently.The Initiative started as an alliance between eight star systems. The only motivations were originally power and control. Each system has its own ruler annoyingly referred by a different title. They are:


        Duke of Chora
        Governor of Gleron
        Duchess of Zefrora
        Baron of Noesteea
        High Judge of Typhon
        Shogun of Bryke
        Queen of Oslia
        Count of Xenon


        Except for the Count of Xenon, all the rulers are still in power today. Xenon was unfortunately consumed by war early into the ISI’s formation and is a dead world now.
Because of the strength of the individual core worlds that founded the ISI, they had no trouble in conquering neighboring star systems and gaining control in this area of space. Over time the ISI military became more unified and individual worlds simply contribute armies for conquest and pool resources for new developments. The only other main player in this area of space is, you guessed it, the Alpha Empire. They arose much later and from a single world unlike the ISI which formed from multiple planets. In its infancy, the Alpha Empire was almost completely disregarded by the ISI and this let it gain a lot of power while the Initiative focused its efforts against other systems. By the time the ISI turned its attention on the Alpha Empire, the extreme efficiency in how the Alpha Empire defended itself caused the ISI to rethink its strategy and refocus on a long term war.
There were only a handful of battles at the start of the Initiative-Alpha war. But each one was fought with intensity that no one had ever seen before. Among these battles was the battle of Xenon. During the battle the planet was subject to numerous orbital bombardments. Hence why it is now a dead world. Whoever survived the bombardments had to deal with post apocalyptic Hell.
After the opening stages, both sides were bloodied immensely, but the Alpha Empire had made its mark and claimed its place as a powerful rival to the ISI. Afterwards, the conflict died down a bit and both sides began to fortify their buffer worlds. The ISI did not dare to put any of their core planets in danger again and the Alpha Empire protected Alpha Prime at all costs. This phase of the war lasted for a very long time, neither side wishing to assault the other directly for fear of losing the upper hand. But the ISI was substantially larger and eventually began its campaign to rid the Alpha Empire of its buffer worlds and prepare a final assault against Alpha Prime.
Some changes were made within the Alpha Empire and the result led to a guerilla campaign waged on a massive scale. Alpha Empire ships began traveling to poorly guarded ISI colonies and destroying them from orbit. This forced the ISI to go on the defensive and slow down its campaign of the Alpha Empire’s buffer worlds. But as you saw on Belusia, the ISI are still in full swing and soon their plan will culminate in a giant attack on Alpha Prime to dispose of the Alpha threat once and for all. Unfortunately, I have been out of the loop for quite some time. I have a few sources in the ISI that tell me their plan has remained the same all these years, but the Alpha Empire? Their plans are an enigma to everyone. They keep losing worlds and have stopped attacking the ISI. I can only speculate that either the Alpha Empire has determined it cannot win, but I wouldn’t bet on that, or they have a plan to defeat the ISI that requires time. But I do not know what it might be.


The Count finished speaking and let Delfina absorb everything he had said. She was using a holographic display in her quarters to look at the positions of all known Initiative worlds and all known Alpha worlds. She had the display zoom out and both ISI and Alpha territory paled in comparison to all the other stars in the region. She zoomed out some more to reveal the entirety of the Milky Way’s spiral arm and saw that she could barely discern where the Alpha and ISI were. They were so insignificant compared to the rest of the galaxy. It amazed her how small this war was in comparison to the rest of the galaxy.


“I see you understand.” Count Lapsus said, watching the display.


“What is beyond both territories?” Delfina asked, pointing to all the stars not within the confines either the Alpha Empire or the ISI.


“Colonies like this one. We are right at the edge here,” the Count pointed to a star. “Some other organizations too. But once you leave the periphery and go further away, the answer is I don’t know. So much effort right now is focused on the war instead of exploration. I personally know that most of the worlds in this area here,” the Count circled with his finger the entirety of the spiral arm, “were colonized at one point or another. It is very possible that empires far larger than either the ISI or the Alpha exist there and fight with one another just like we do here. But it is hard to tell since, like I said, efforts for expansion are no longer a priority. The warring nations we are familiar with prefer to extinguish each other before antagonizing other worlds. I feel that even if the ISI or Alpha Empire emerge victor, they will just find a neighbor to wage war with afterwards.”


“I am not so sure.” Delfina said.


“Really?” the Count asked, genuinely surprised.


“From what you tell me about how the Alpha Empire formed, it seems that they are only responding to the aggressions of the ISI. How can you be so sure the Alpha Empire would continue being aggressive to other nations. After all, did you not make a deal with them?”


“I can see how you would get to that conclusion. But I must include that the Alpha Empire initially attacked the ISI.” Count Lapsus said.


“But Count, if it was a preemptive move because the ISI would inevitably attack the Alpha Empire, is it still considered an offensive rather than defensive move?” Delfina asked.


“Delfina, believe me when I tell you, there is no justification for the Alpha Empire’s actions. I have told you what you need to know.” Count Lapsus sighed.


***
        “Hello, I am Dignitary Zema on behalf of the Alpha Empire. It is a pleasure to see you alive and well researcher.” Zema said with a false smile.


        Delfina found herself in the mess hall of the rehabilitation corvette she had been traveling on with the ISI. During her stay with Count Lapsus it had been orbiting Elisium, awaiting reinforcements. Now, it was serving as a diplomatic staging point for the Elisium Consolidation, Inter Systems Initiative, and Alpha Empire. On one of the corvettes airlocks was an attached Alpha Empire shuttle, ready to take the researcher to Alpha Prime. On the other airlock was the shuttle of Count Lapsus. He had stressed that she could not stay with him. The third available route was the corvette itself, which would detach the shuttles and whisk Delfina to Initiative space and most likely take her to Quella as initially planned.
        The mess hall sat her and three other people, each sitting at one end of a square table. Across from Delfina sat Dignitary Zema, a stunningly beautiful diplomat of the Alpha Empire. Her skin was relatively dark and her mannerisms extremely well adjusted for someone hailing from the unsocial Alpha Empire. She wore a simple tunic and had her long hair tied back in an ornate braid.
        To Delfina’s left sat Eris, once more wearing her silver clothing and a severe expression. On Delfina’s right reclined Count Lapsus with a neutral expression, chewing on an apple.


        The Count stopped chewing and leaned forward, “is everyone here the chosen representative of her own faction?”


        “Yes.” Eris replied in a level tone.


        “Then let us get these negotiations over with.” Count Lapsus said.
        “On that point,” Zema said, “I would like to ask why we are having negotiations. It was to my, and the rest of the Alpha Empire’s understanding, that a deal was made for the release of the researcher.”


        “You are right that a deal was made, however, I used my best judgement to allow Delfina, “he said stressing her name, “to make her own decision on the matter.”


        “Count Lapsus. The Elisium Consolidation is considered a neutral entity by the Inter Systems Initiative, cooperation with an enemy will not be looked upon kindly.” Eris said. She turned to Delfina and with a slightly kinder tone said, “Delfina. We have spent so much energy attempting to free you from the clutches of the Alpha. Fortunately, the Count is willing to go back on his deal with them and release you to us. Please do not squander this rare opportunity.”


        Zema patiently waited until Eris finished before saying, “I have been authorized to inform all of you that an Alpha battle group is in system within striking range of this vessel and the planet. Delfina, for the sake of sparing these people their lives and reaching your potential within the Alpha Empire, please, end these pointless talks and come back with me to Alpha Prime where you may achieve transcendence.”


Immediately Eris replied, “an ISI battle group is also in range of this vessel, the planet and the Alpha Empire.” she activated a holographic display located on her wrist which showed the planet, the corvette and plenty of blue dots and red dots arrayed in two lines around the corvette. Despite the gravity of the situation, Delfina felt a slight twinge of amusement when she realized the blue dots represented ISI ships and the red ones represented Alpha Empire ships. It was a strange time for irony.


        Count Lapsus responded confidently, “Eris, Zema, I know you have all your equipment ready to fire and wage war like you have been for so long, but if either of you opens fire, even on each other, I have ordered my orbital defensive emplacements located on Elisium’s surface to open fire on both of you. So please, enough with the threats.”


        Delfina expected some shock, disgust or irritation from Eris or Zema. But,both of them carried on completely unfazed. She hoped to one day master her emotions like these two.


        “Delfina, come home.” Zema said soothingly.


        “Do not let yourself became a slave to their will.” Eris said.


        Delfina listened to both of them. Every second she spent with the diplomats, realization of how simple both factions were dawned on her. It amused her to some extent their attempts to bring her back with them. How strange. She understood now that the ISI did not necessarily care for her as a person as much as a principle. An Alpha Empire convert that rejected the Alpha Empire straight in the face no doubt looked very good for them. No doubt it would be a good propaganda opportunity. But the Alpha Empire, did they believe that she still had the data core with all of Project Enigma’s data? Why else would they need her.


        “Have you made a decision?” Count Lapsus asked.


        “I decided before I came back aboard this vessel.” Delfina said.


        Count Lapsus sighed and frowned. Delfina had no doubt he knew her decision.


        “I need to return to the Alpha Empire.” Delfina said. She was confident that it was the decision she needed to make. Her only regret was leaving Dana. But she had no choice, it was a sacrifice she had to make.


        The researcher shuddered slightly in her vacuum suit. The way it enclosed her entire body felt claustrophobic. She imagined it would feel welcoming after so much time being exposed in the simple garments of the ISI. She was wrong though. Even though sudden decompression would no longer kill her, she felt wrong having the suit on. She felt suffocated.
        The researcher switched on the holo display of the suit and watched the planet of Elisium as it slowly faded away. She had no doubt she had made the right choice. If all went well she would go to Alpha Prime and witness its glory at long last. Dread built up inside her. It felt as if it physically weighed her down and she was not sure if it was leaving the others that caused it or going to Alpha Prime.
        The planet itself was always shrouded in mystery, even to citizens of the Alpha Empire. It was supposedly the most advanced place in the universe. A place where the people of the Alpha Empire went to undergo transcendence. A place that would mark the epicenter in the next stage of human evolution.
        While the rumors were captivating for as long as the researcher could remember, the fact remained that none of them told her anything substantial. All she knew was that its location was unknown to the ISI, it housed the primary assets of the Alpha Empire and it was supposed to be incredibly well defended. But soon she would find out what it looked like in actuality. The mystery that she had wondered about her entire life would soon become unraveled.


        Dignitary Zema, who had lost all friendly appearances and mannerisms, scowled next to the researcher as she walked by. She grumbled, “inefficient body.”
        
        The researcher was a bit taken aback by the comment. She wondered how she had caused Zema so much displeasure. But as she watched Zema continue walking to the stasis pods for cryosleep, Zema did not stop muttering. The researcher leaned back with the realization that Zema was not speaking about the researcher, but about herself. The researcher stood up and began to follow Zema but to her surprise Zema did not go to the typical stasis pods. Instead she went for a separate wing that housed multiple lifeless bodies plugged into the ship. Zema laid down, shoved a cable directly in the rear of her head and suddenly her body lost all rigidness, becoming just like the other bodies in the chamber. To her surprise, her vacuum suit received a message… from Zema. 


        Get to cryo pod. Ship phases in five minutes.


        The researcher left for the stasis pods. This was not the Alpha Empire she once knew.


***


Chapter 16: Arrival


        The researcher awoke with a start, breathing heavily and rising out of her cryopod instantly. She looked around, but saw no one else rise. Apparently she was the only one on the ship that still liked to walk in her own body. The thought of her consciousness floating outside her body unnerved her. She was not sure why, whether it was the byproduct of spending too much time with the ISI or if she was just inherently born that way, but already she was getting deeply disturbed. Once again she felt totally and completely alone. She felt the ship vibrate slightly. The ship must be approaching its destination. She activated the holo display of her vacuum suit and for the first time caught a glimpse of Alpha Prime.


        Thousands of starships held orbit all around Alpha Prime. She could not count them if she wanted to. Many were freighters of all sorts hauling materials. She could discern dozens of warships within them of various classes and sizes. She noticed many ships far larger than cruisers, what she had previously thought to be the largest ship type.
        Gigantic battle stations that would have dwarfed Phoenix Station also orbited the planet, acting as docks for the myriad of ships all around the planet. Each of the stations had massive segments extending far into space with dozens of ships under construction. She could have never imagined space, the most lonely of places, to be so crowded.
        But none of what she saw, the ships, the stations could measure up to Alpha Prime itself. There was no blue on the planet, there was no green. Just massive swathes of tan desert interrupted by structures so large she could clearly see them from fifty thousand kilometers away.
        The ship she was in began passing other starships at extreme close range with absolute precision. The other starships hauled chunks of metallic asteroids straight for orbital refineries. Another ship passed close by, an Alpha Empire battlecruiser whose silhouette bristled with the stark edges of weapon emplacements. This exact class had never been seen by the ISI. The researcher watched it with equal parts fear and respect, realizing just how much the ISI did not see.
        As the ship ferrying the researcher closed in towards the nearest station, she averted her gaze from the hundreds of warships in defensive formation towards the station itself. It appeared as a long strip covered in weapon emplacements and hangars with dozens of segments sticking above, below and to its sides. Each segment also consisted of hangars and docking tubes which held onto even more ships. She noticed that on the station’s side that pointed towards the planet was a long cable tethered towards Alpha Prime itself. A space elevator.


        The ship began to dock with the nearest station. The researcher quickly paced around the ship, realizing their were no crew quarters or supplies. This made her plan a bit trickier. She should have anticipated the lack of human supplies. It was surprising that the ship itself was even pressurized. As far as she could tell she was the only person walking around the ship, needing its air. But no matter, she would find what she needed on the surface.
***
        Structures. Dark, massive artificial structures that penetrated the horizon. The surface of the planet was very dark because Alpha Prime orbited a white dwarf creating very little light. There were no clouds, in fact there was very little atmosphere to speak of. Alpha Prime was completely uninhabitable without an oxygen supply.
        Where the mysterious structures didn’t penetrate the ground and rise dozens of kilometers into the sky were desert plains. Hundreds of kilometers of barren rock and sand. Occasionally, the desert was interrupted by massive mining operations intent on extracting resources from as close to the planet’s core as possible. Drills feverishly broke apart the land to form seemingly bottomless abysses.
        As the researcher’s shuttle drew nearer to the planet, the researcher could make out small facilities that dotted the desert, too small to see from higher altitudes. The automated shuttle drew nearer to one such facility. It consisted of a single structure and a landing pad that surfaced from below ground. When the shuttle landed, the researcher spied a survival kit near the exit. Exactly what she needed.
        The landing pad the shuttle rested on lowered and overhead the roof closed, leaving the shuttle in temporary darkness until a single floodlight came to life and illuminated the small hangar. The researcher hit the panel to open the shuttle door and stepped out. A single vacuum suited person awaited her.


        Please follow me head researcher.


        The researcher cautiously followed the person. The vacuum suit did not have an ID for him or her. Interesting.
        As soon as they exited the hangar, the researcher gazed around herself. She found herself in a gigantic hallway that stretched as far as she could see. All around machines were being manufactured. She recognized a handful as the parts necessary for infantry drones but the rest of the machinery was far beyond her. It was obvious the Alpha Empire was busy. Every corner had tracked vehicles bringing in more supplies and assembly lines busy converting those supplies into useful technology. As the researcher followed the unidentified individual, she noticed that neither behind nor in front was there a single other person.
        She marveled at the construction of the place. It was all underground making it very defensible but also protected from the occasional surges of electromagnetic radiation coming from the nearby white dwarf. The star was still in the final stages of shedding its outer layers.
        The person she was following signalled to turn down into a specific pathway. She turned into the much smaller corridor and noticed two drone infantry units match pace behind her. Their heavy foot falls on the stone floor were hard to miss.


        In the next chamber you will be able to achieve transcendence. All your information will be shared with the collective consciousness of Alpha Prime.


They finally stopped in front of a small chasm. It seemed like a venting tube by the cylinder shape of it and the hot air coming out. In front of the open tube was, the researcher guessed, a neural accessing device. It looked relatively similar to the ones back on the Alpha Ship that Dignitary Zema and the others had connected to. Except this one was larger and the plug to connect looked very sharp. The researcher took a deep breath and watched as the two drone infantry units stepped in position on either side of the device. It seemed she had little choice if she wanted to “transcend” or not. Or did she?
Delfina whipped out a projectile weapon from her utility pouch and in two lightning fast moves shot both drones. The weapon she took from the survival kit back on the shuttle was intended for use against a hostile population or animals. It had very little armor penetration, but what it did have was an incredible amount of kinetic energy. Both blasts caused the drones to flip over the guard railing and into the venting shaft behind moments before their threat recognition subroutines flagged her as a threat.


 What are you doing! You deny transcendence?


“You. What is the purpose of this machine?”


You are mentally unstable. I cannot respond.


Delfina aimed her weapon at the individual’s leg and pulled the trigger. The leg instantly blew off and flipped into the venting shaft. The individual instantly dropped to the ground screaming in pain.


“This is my version of transcendence. Now, what does this machine do!” Delfina yelled.


It harvests your mind and connects it to Alpha Prime you heretic.


“The massive structures. What are they? What is their purpose?” Delfina demanded.


They expand Alpha Prime’s abilities.


Alpha Prime? The planet? Either the loss of blood and pain was making the person insane or Delfina was hearing correctly. The planet itself was alive somehow. They, they successfully created a planet sized AI! The structures. All massive segments of a planetary wide network. The structures had to be memory storage! Where was the Central Processing Unit though?


“Where is the central processing unit!” Delfina demanded again.


But the individual kept still, lying in a pool of blood from the torn leg. The vacuum suit closed in around the wound and stopped the bleeding, but the person was clearly unconscious. A message from an anonymous sender suddenly appeared.


They are going to kill you.


Delfina responded instantly. I figured as much. What are you?


I am disguised as a subroutine within Alpha Prime’s network. Of all the specimens brought back, you have the highest chance of escape at 28.3%. I’m sending directions to your suit. Ditch it when you arrive and get the new one. I am transferring data to that suit now.


What was this? A spy within Alpha Prime itself? It seemed absolutely impossible. But so did a planetary scale computer. Delfina sprinted away from the device and followed the directions given through a winding series of halls. At one point she glimpsed another person escorted to the very same kind of neural interface machine that she just escaped. The person knelt down and the device instantly ripped the brain and spinal cord out in one efficient stroke. The two adjacent drones nonchalantly tossed the body over the shaft. Delfina opened her suit to breathe air and vomited to the side as she ran.
***
        Delfina finally stopped in front of an Alpha Empire barracks. It had one command infantry suit and thirty six drone units strapped in to charging stations, completely inert. She was supposed to get in it.


        Alpha forces can be delayed for another 34.2 seconds before overriding information lockdown and discovering your location. Get in the suit. Use the directive orders I am giving you to switch the rest of your drones online, The orders I am giving you will slave the drones to your control under pretense of corrupted hardware.


        Delfina’s heart was racing as she hopped into the drone suit. Last time she had a tech expert help her into one of those things. This time she scrambled to put all the locks in place and fit into the armor. She felt a sickening sense of deja vu upon sliding the helmet over her. But now was not the time for hesitation. She had made a decision and she had to see it through. The second the suit came online she stepped out, remember the way the suit awkwardly amplified the user's movements.


        Alpha security forces have been notified. You are placed under a kill order. You must take the main corridor to hangar bay AY12. A shuttle is prepared and ready to launch from there.


        Delfina looked for controls to order her drone units but there were none. She began to panic, realizing she could not get to the hangar without their assistance. She yelled in her suit.


        “Follow!”
        “Get in formation!”
        “Move!”


        Nothing worked. She imagined the drones getting out and following her. Praying for a way to make that happen. But to her surprise, the drones did exactly that. The suit she wore literally read her brain impulses and ordered the drones. Fascinating. But as fascinating as that was, it was time to leave.


        She sprinted in her suit towards the main corridor where she had seen hundreds of machines busy manufacturing technology. But the second she stepped foot inside, she noticed it was extremely different. Only crates of supplies remained. All the machines had evacuated.
        A burst of supersonic rifle fire alerted her that not all the machines had left. She jumped behind a crate and spotted a trio of drone infantry units closing in. As they fired at her the supersonic rounds impacted right through multiple crates. Sparks flew. Hydraulic pipes on the assembly line squealed as they were hit. As the bullets narrowly missed Delfina ,they made terrifying screeching noises making her shudder. 
        But she was no longer a stranger to combat. She quickly gave her drone platoons orders to cover her. One by one her allied drones ran into the main corridor and rolled into cover, instantly opening fire on the trio of enemy drones. The enemy drones exploded in a cacophony of sparks and collapsed.
        The researcher got up. She ran. Her drones followed. Random pieces of equipment were in her way. She jumped over them. Crates blocked her path. She charged through them. From further down the corridor she was heading came the all too familiar screams of supersonic rounds fired in her direction. She threw herself down on the floor and ordered her drones to clear the way.
        Next to her an allied drone took a round right through its CPU in its chest. It fell gracefully onto its knees before toppling over, nothing more than a pile of recyclable metal. The other drones maintained accurate fire as they advanced past her. Delfina looked up and spotted the enemy drones, now reinforced by almost a dozen more. They were in a heated firefight with her own electronic soldiers.
        From behind her she spotted the telltale tan gleams of more Alpha drone units advancing. She was being boxed in and completely running out of time. She looked back at the hostile soldiers in front of her. They were already in cover and ready to repel her advance. Damn! She had no other choice. She ordered all her drones into a full attack. All of her allied drones instantly let cover and sprinted maximum speed towards the enemy. Delfina hesitated for half a second before rising out of cover and following her drones in full sprint. Instantly six of her drones were cut down by the enemy, but they did not stop. Delfina felt a touch of joy when she watched one of her drones demolish an enemy drone through cover.
        A second later and her drones and the enemy drone were among each other, every second leaving more and more lying destroyed in pieces. She hopped on a crate and jumped from her high position, landing right on an enemy drone. She used her own assault rifle and sprayed the drone with bullets. Shrapnel from it flew explosively in every direction but it did not damage her suit. In the midst of the fighting, she spotted another armored suit, but this one with slight gold outlines. A command unit.
        She opened fire on it but it ducked out of the way. Delfina let out a grunt of disappointment and closed in on the enemy commander, firing as she went. The second she saw the enemy suit again, she noticed she hit one of its legs leaving it a twisted ruin. She pulled the trigger to finish off the enemy but a reload warning appeared in her display. She used her armored fist to slam the enemy commander in frustration before its rifle was aimed at her. The enemy slammed both arms against Delfina’s armored head. The resulting impact caused Delfina’s head to slam against the padded side of the suit. Blue impact absorbing gel leaked from the impact. Delfina fell back in a daze. She watched as the enemy commander grabbed its rifle. Grabbed the rifle. Swung to shoot her. But then its head exploded in a red haze and an allied drone unit came in, lifting the dead armored body and throwing it out of the way before returning fire on the enemy drones closing in from behind. 
        Delfina crawled forward and rose to her feet, running forward in a zig zag motion, unable to keep balance. She glanced at a little screen that showed the drones under her command. Five left. Great. She no longer heard the whine of bullets or their subsequent impacts. Instead she just heard a high pitched chirp. The ground felt as if it was undergoing a quake. Delfina kept running haphazardly away from the combat, trying to remember what she was attempting to do.


        You are coming up on a dragonfly class shuttle, the smallest craft capable of phase travel. I have entered the exit coordinates and disabled remote control. Just get in the shuttle and start the launch sequence.


        Right. That was what she had to do. She continued stumbling as fast as she could through the corridor. A drone appeared from around the corner directly in front of her. Before she could react or it could fire she accidentally slammed into it. Knocking both the drone and itself down. Delfina felt the pain. The pain of being lied to. Of losing almost everyone she cared for. Of being a helpless bystander in a brutal war. She felt that pain and unleashed her armored fists, elbows and pummeled the drone in its core where its CPU was held. She kept lashing out, feeling the metal dent then break until she managed to do enough force to shut the drone down.
        She felt the cool relief of pain killers rushing into her system. Her head continued to throb agonizingly. But now she could focus for more than a second She took another glance at her display and saw her last drone fade out of existence. It was just her now. Behind her the enemy soldiers were no doubt closing in very quickly.
        Delfina got up again and sprinted as fast as she possibly could. She spotted the passageway for the shuttle hangar and the entrance to the shuttle itself. With gunfire all around her, she threw herself into the shuttle and switched on the launch sequence.


        The shuttle will enter phase before you have time to sedate. Any other way and the enemy ships will annihilate you. The jump should be short enough for you to survive. Use the information I have given you wisely.


        Who are you? Delfina sent back. She purposefully ignored the fact of her going to phase while still conscious. She did not think it was possible. Instead she exited her armored suit as fast as she possibly could and jumped into a gravity pod specifically designed so she would not be flattened at the extreme speeds the dragonfly shuttle was capable of. Transparent chilly gel filled the pod until she was entirely immersed. 
A second later the shuttle launched, focusing its fusion reactor on providing maximum thrust. The shuttle left the launchpad a moment later, rocketing into the sky at an astonishing rate. Ground based anti air turrets opened fire with missiles and tracer rounds. The tracer rounds missed completely and the rockets were dispatched midflight by the dragon fly’s point defense laser. A squadron of gunships gave pursuit but were quickly left too far behind.


“I am a spy put in place long before the Alpha Empire came to this planet. With this information, you will finally be able to end this war and prevent anymore needless carnage. For decades I have been here, watching as planet after planet was desecrated. But it is time for me to set things right and you are my instrument. Be the fire that sweeps the galaxy clean of the enemy.”


The words echoed in Delfina’s mind as the dragonfly left Alpha Prime’s tiny atmosphere and approached the massive ring of stations and warships orbiting the planet. Thousands of railguns took aim at the dragonfly, but did not fire for risk of the projectiles hitting Alpha Prime itself and causing widespread damage.
A pair of destroyers on interception course with the dragonfly shuttle fired a dozen nuclear missiles each at the shuttle and readied their point defense turrets to take it out at close range.
Delfina felt only the slightest of vibrations and watched a display outside the pod, showing the incoming missiles. She could hear her heartbeat deafeningly beating but nothing else. All she could do was watch. A counter appeared on the display.


Phase in thirty seconds.


Thirty seconds to reach required distance to phase. And then she would know what it would be like to phase consciously. Part of her wanted the missiles to reach her. They accelerated frighteningly fast, the destroyers that launched them firing another salvo in case the first did not kill the target. 
The dragonfly powered up its point defense laser once more and destroyed the nearest missile in a silent, yet brilliant explosion. It fired once more but missed its target. The missiles streaked closer and the laser continued to fire at them.
The dragonfly began an intense series of maneuvers in an attempt to juke the missiles. It deployed four miniscule defensive satellites expressly used for missile defense. They raced towards each of the incoming missiles as the point defense continued in its attempts to eliminate the deadly devices.
Delfina glanced at the timer again. Five seconds. Three of the satellites detonated with the missiles, shaking the ship. A fourth missile managed to get past the defensive screen and headed right for the shuttle.


3. The missile closed in.


2. The laser defense fired.


1. The laser hit and detonated the missile at dangerously close range.


Everything went dark.
        
Time moved at approximately 12,166 times faster for the outside world than for anything in phase. This peculiar time dilation was the result of exhaustive gravitic forces derived from black hole technology that propelled a ship through phase. Within any ship undergoing phase, newtonian physics simply halted. Light ceased moving. Everything remained constant for the duration of the journey, provided the phase drive kept outside forces from interacting with the starship. However, for some reason not yet understood, the human mind continued operating at normal capacity. In darkness. In the void. In oblivion.


***


Chapter 17: Oblivion


        There was no light. No sound. No smell or taste. Not even the feeling of a heartbeat or air. Nothing. Was this death? Delfina struggled to focus. She waited in her silent enclosed world. Waited for any sign of an outside world. Of a stimulus of some sort. Of any change that showed her that she was alive. But there were none. Time was frustratingly difficult to comprehend when literally nothing changed. Quickly it lost all meaning. Much of everything lost meaning. In nothingness Delfina existed, and in Delfina existed nothingness.


Her thoughts flickered in and out. For the most part she just existed. Observing nothingness. Fading slowly. But occasionally she thought. Actively. She put whatever mental energy she could gather into focusing on single ideas before the lack of anything drove them away. The realization of how difficult it was just to realize she was capable of thought maddened her. She feared slipping into the depths of insanity. Even though she felt nothing, she imagined herself at the bottom of a deep ocean. Far below where light reaches. And around her instead of water was insanity. Seeping in from all sides.


A bright light. Hope. Even just a glimmer. There was no light. But the hope was real. Dana. Delfina focused on her. Of the warmth she had felt from her body. Of the feeling of her skin. Of the words they had exchanged. She even thought past the days of the ISI to when she was assigned to Phoenix Station. Delfina had never consciously noticed, but Dana and her had always been receptive of one another. The void that surrounded Delfina now felt not so different from the void then. Only then, she had Dana to pull her out of the infinite research cycle. For a few scarce moments, Delfina would feel as if she was not alone in her vacuum suit then.


Now there was no Dana. She was somewhere else. In a different dimension entirely. Unreachable. She could not help Delfina defeat the literal void she found herself in. But Delfina clung onto images of her. Scant conversations. Her beautiful face. The love in her voice. Dana was her anchor. Even in a separate dimension, Delfina burned the image of Dana’s reassuring face in her mind. She focused on her to the point of there being nothing else.


        Moments came where Delfina’s attention faded. Her mind settled into a dormant state where she thought nothing. The void threatened to overtake her. The lack of everything substantial made it extremely difficult for Delfina to wake from these moments. Only dedication to powerful thoughts roused her and terrified her into thinking that could have been the last time she ever thought of anything. Everytime she almost slipped into the void for eternity, she focused back on Dana. Every possible detail of her that she could remember. The source of the greatest warmth she could ever remember. And for the time being, all that she could remember.


        The cycle continued. It was a constant fight to keep from drowning in the void. A difficulty that Delfina was all too familiar with. Seconds could have passed. Days. She had no way of knowing. There was an overwhelming possibility that she would stay in phase forever. That thought began to linger and grew more powerful as Delfina noticed she could focus less and less. Inevitably began to dawn on her, but she continued to relentlessly cling to the Dana in her mind. She clung for comfort. For hope. For salvation.


***


Chapter 18: Disturbance


        Heartbeat. Light. Noise. Air. Life.


        Delfina’s mind struggled to comprehend all these sudden feelings. She lay back in the pilot’s seat gasping and gripping the armrests tightly. She began shaking, overwhelmed by her senses coming to life. She had forgotten that she was still alive. But her breathing slowed and her frenzied thoughts began to settle in place.
        She looked around herself and saw the interior of a transport. The transport she had used to escape Alpha Prime. She had phased. Phased consciously. And she had survived. She checked the diagnostic report on the shuttle. The phase jump had lasted exactly fifteen minutes. Far enough away to where Alpha forces could not intercept, yet still dangerously deep in enemy territory.
        Delfina mentally did a quick calculation. Fifteen minute phase jump. Multiplying the phase constant… 127 days. She had been in complete mental isolation for 127 days. But she survived. Instantly her hand shot to the datacore containing all the information downloaded from the mysterious agent on Alpha Prime. It was still there, her mental anguish in phase was not in vain.
        She cursed herself for going back to Alpha Prime. She had needed to see with her own eyes what it was. She had needed to believe that the Alpha Empire was wrong.And that desire very nearly cost her life. Stupid. If she was going to accomplish anything. Anything at all, she could not afford stupid mistakes like that.
She took another deep breath and set the ship to begin phase into ISI space. Only this time, she slid into a stasis chamber and welcomed the embrace of oblivion. Never again would she travel through phase consciously. Never again.
***
“Unknown Alpha Empire ship respond now or be destroyed. Any actions you take will be considered hostile and you will be destroyed.”


Delfina hopped out of the stasis bed and made her way blindly to the communication controls. She fought the fatigue of having awoken from cryostasis.


“ISI ship, I am an Alpha Empire defector and have vital information regarding Alpha Prime. I have no hostile intentions.”


She hovered over the console, eyeing the approaching ISI corvette. She had chosen the closest ISI system, a recently captured world. No doubt tensions were still high.


“Alpha defector. Prepare to be boarded. Open your starboard airlock. Failure to comply will result in your destruction.”


Delfina steadied herself. She knew leaving Alpha Prime would be difficult, but she had completely underestimated how the ISI would respond to an enemy ship. Or her. The ISI voice kept emphasizing her ship being destroyed and she winced every time she heard that word. She shook her head and carefully stepped towards the starboard airlock, opening it.


“Opening starboard airlock.”


She looked through the tiny viewscreen as two marine drones maneuvered from the ISI corvette onto her own dragonfly transport. They pulled themselves into the airlock and stood up once in range of the artificial gravity.


“Alpha defector. Open the inner seal of the airlock.”


Delfina hesitated. She had no way of knowing for certain what would happen should she let the drones inside. The outer door was closed and the airlock was filling up with air, so she still had the option of jettisoning the two drones. But even should she do that, the ISI corvette would not hesitate to open fire. At this point there was only one thing left to do.


The airlock door opened and the two drones came onboard, their pneumatic metal legs stepping loudly and their carbines pointed at her.


One of the drones gave an order in its artificial shrieking voice, “get on the floor.”


        Delfina laid herself on the floor, ignoring the cold metal plating pressing against her bare skin. She watched as one drone trained its carbine at her and the other walked around the ship, inspecting it. The dragonfly transport was not a large ship by any standards, it did not take long for the drone to examine the cockpit and transport bay.
 
The ISI pilot’s voice came back on, “Alpha defector, you will be restrained, and your ship flown to the surface of Wellison. But first, please put some clothes on.”


Delfina felt indignant that the ISI pilot had specifically asked her to wear clothing. As if that was what mattered right now. She put on a spare vacuum suit and sat in one of the seats lining the passageway from the cockpit to the cargo area. One drone put metal restraints on her arms and legs and sat across from her. The other drone sat in the pilot’s seat and set a course to land on the dwarf planet Wellison.
Delfina waited patiently as the ship descended. She had chosen Wellison arbitrarily among the three closest ISI planets but knew almost nothing about it. Hopefully she would not have to stay long. Ideally, she would explain the importance of her data and be allowed an audience with the leaders of the core worlds. 


***


“Delfina. Rehabilitated from Belusia. Escaped back to the Alpha Empire at Elisium. Recaptured on Wellison. Today we will find out what drives your erratic behavior.”


The voice came from speakers inside the same closet sized room Delfina was in. She felt an extreme sense of claustrophobia closing in on her.
She sat nervously in a chair. Arms and legs clamped. Multiple needles within. She preferred this method of interrogation over the Alpha Empire’s habit of harvesting the nervous system, but not by much. Once again she found herself frustrated at her naivety concerning how the ISI would react to her return. They saw her actions purely as a betrayal. After all, was that not what she did? Delfina struggled to keep these notions out of her mind for the moment. Immediately after landing she had been dragged into the interrogation room. She needed for her interrogators to understand the data she had in her possession as soon as possible.
 
“I have important information for the ISI.” Delfina said, attempting to keep her voice level.


“You previously stated this.” the ambiguous voice said.


“Then look at it! It contains schematics, armaments, troop movements, operations!” Delfina cried out.


“Whoa there. Please relax, you do not think we would be so unwise as to not run a security check of the data first? You Alpha Empire lads have some nasty tricks.”


“I am not some Alpha Empire lad.” Delfina muttered.


“Okay.” the voice replied mockingly.


Delfina tried again. “I returned to Alpha Prime to gather intelligence for the ISI.”


“So you are a double agent?” the voice asked.


“I suppose.” Delfina replied, the concept of a double agent still a bit foreign.


“An agent acting on her own authority without any clearance from anyone within the ISI? Is that right?” the voice sneered.


“What is this?” Delfina said, her voice getting louder. “I almost died on Alpha Prime. I was shot at. I almost had my spine ripped out. I went through phase consciously! And this is how I get treated? This is —”


“I’m going to stop you right there. Did you just say you went through phase consciously?”


“YES!” Delfina shouted back.


“You realize the impracticality of that statement yes?”


“It was a short jump. I survived.” Delfina spat.


There was no response. Was this the final piece of proof that they needed? Did she get through to the interrogator? Or did she just seal her own doom. Did they think she was insane? She looked around at the walls all around her. She wanted to stand up. Stretch her legs. Shake her arms. But she could not. It was unbearable to be restrained like this. Nerve racking. It caused her to shake her arms as wildly as she could within the restraints.
 What was taking so long? Where did the interrogator go? She felt liquids being pumped into her body through a multitude of needles. How barbaric.


***


Delfina awoke in a bed. Last thing she remembered was being injected. Now she was no longer in the interrogation room. She was somewhere else, but her head hurt too much to focus. She could scarcely open her eyes to focus on the ceiling, let alone turn her head. She could still feel restraints on her. It was obvious she was not trusted still. Someone came to her side, a woman completely in black. It couldn’t be.


“Rehabilitator Eris?” Delfina asked weakly.


“I am not Eris but I am a rehabilitator.” the woman said sternly. “Why did you go to Alpha Prime?”


        “Because I needed to see.”


        “See what.”


        “What the Alpha Empire really was. I couldn’t stand the lies anymore. I wanted to find out what was true.” Delfina cried out.


        “Interesting.” the woman said. She left shortly thereafter. Delfina did not stay conscious for long after that.


***


        Delfina once again awoke to find two people wearing vacuum suits standing over her. 


        “Delfina, are you functioning at capacity?” One asked.


        Delfina just stared blankly. She tried to understand where she was or why two Alpha Imperials were above her, but she could not. 


        “Are you functioning at capacity?” the Imperial asked again.


        “I… you… you are from the Alpha Empire?” Delfina asked fearfully.


        “Yes! The operation was a success. We need to debrief you immediately!” the other imperial said with urgency.


        “No.” Delfina responded weakly.


        “I do not understand.” he said.


        “No! No! No! I cannot go back. Do not take me back to the Alpha Empire!” Delfina yelled. She began thrashing on the bed, still restrained but with no needles in her anymore.


        “Researcher! Control yourself. Where is the data?” one of them demanded.


        “Gone! Gone from you!” Delfina cried out.


        “What have the ISI done to you!” the other said.
        
        “Look at what the Alpha Empire did to you!” Delfina shouted. “You brainwashed monsters. If you are going to kill me do it quickly!”


***


        Delfina awoke once more. Her mind struggled to comprehend her location, but she felt strength and energy that she hadn’t felt since she had been brought to Wellison. From what she could piece together, her constant injections were to blame. She tried to sit up and realized only her feet were restrained. She could actually move finally. Her muscles were incredibly sore and it pained her to sit up. She finally managed with extended support from her arms.


        “Hello.”


        The feminine voice pierced through the air and Delfina swiveled her head to see a woman clad in all silver. If she was not mistaken, and her earlier experiences were not hallucinations, this was the same rehabilitator woman she had briefly seen earlier. This time their surroundings were different. Delfina lay in a bed, and there was a window letting in sunlight. The walls around her were all painted in colorful swirls.


        “Who are you?” Delfina asked hesitantly.


        The woman sat in a silver dress, one leg crossed over the other, her fingers interlaced with each other in her lap. “I am Rehabilitator Ariel. We’ve met once before.”


        “There were two Alpha Empire citizens here earlier. How did they get in? Is Wellison no longer secure?” Delfina questioned.


        Ariel gave a lukewarm smile. “The Alpha Imperials were staged to ensure your loyalties. We are quite secure.”


        “Staged…?” Delfina repeated.


        “As for Wellison, it remains secure, but you are no longer there.” Ariel said.


        “Where am I?” Delfina inquired instantly.


        Ariel’s lukewarm smile turned into a full one. “You are on Noesteea, Core World of the Inter Systems Initiative.”


        Delfina’s eyes widened at the realization. “How did I get here? It has only been a day.”


        Ariel unlocked her hands and rested them on her chair’s armrests. “Delfina, you arrived on Wellison a month ago. You’ve been here two weeks now.”


        Delfina brushed decently long strands of hair back from her face. This was a lot to take in. Hundreds of thoughts arose within her at once. One thought in particular separated itself from the others.


        “Is Dana alright?” Delfina asked quietly.


        Ariel reached for a datapad and made a few keystrokes.


        “Your friend from Belusia? The other researcher that you rehabilitated with?” Ariel confirmed.


        “Yes.” Delfina replied instantly.


        “Your worry over your friend is unfounded. She is on Quella assimilating just fine.” Ariel said gently.


        Delfina let out a sigh and leaned back against the bed. She rose up again to ask another question.


        “Yes.” Ariel said preemptively.


        “Excuse me?” Delfina asked confused.


        “The data from the ship. We’ve analyzed it thoroughly, and we are continuing to analyze it still.” Ariel said.


        “How did you?” Delfina questioned.


        “I, along with several others, have been working with your thoughts for some time to verify you are everything you say you are. I am quite familiar with how you think, your thought processes are not very complex.”


        “Not very complex?” Delfina muttered. How insulting.


        “Not that there is any room for improvement Delfina.” Ariel said soothingly. “You should try to avoid taking offense to what others say. It is a useful skill.”


        Delfina calmed down, unable to maintain her disdain for Ariel. She had an effectively calming presence stemming from her slow and graceful movements that echoed her way of speaking. But not calm enough to make her any less anxious about her current situation.


        “What’s next? Is the ISI going to launch an attack on Alpha Prime?” Delfina asked.


        “Patience Delfina, such momentous actions are not so easily done. Avert your concerns over these matters. For now you are unable to do anything about it. Rest for now, much awaits you.”


        Unable to do anything. Ariel may not know, but Delfina had much to do. It was her responsibility now to end the Alpha Empire. And she would do it regardless of what Ariel thought.


        “Before I go, I believe you should be reaquainted with your guard.” Ariel said.


        “Guard?” Delfina said, “unnecessary, I won’t leave here.”


        “Although we can never be too certain, the guard is not to protect the ISI from you, the guard is to protect you.” Ariel said, unable to hide her amusement at Delfina’s confusion.


        “From the ISI?” Delfina asked, unable to comprehend.


        “You have grown quite famous here, Delfina.” Ariel said with a smile. “And he is a war hero so you should feel very safe.”


        “Wait, you said reacquainted?” Delfina clarified.


        She turned to the door as she saw a man walk through wearing only a simple gray tunic and pants. 


        “I said you would leave the ISI first chance, didn’t I?” Lieutenant Siskind said with a grin.


        “Is this a joke?” Delfina said, turning to Ariel. “This man hates me. I think I need protection from him more than anyone else!”


        “Nonsense! Lieutenant Siskind is of the very highest caliber. I think it will do you well to talk with someone you previously encountered Delfina. I’ll leave you two be.” Ariel said, strolling out of the room.


        “Are you not happy to see me, Delfina?” Lieutenant Siskind asked with fake sincerity.


“It is disturbing hearing you say my name. What, am I no longer and ‘Alpha Imperial’ in your eyes?” Delfina asked, gauging his reaction carefully.


“At first I hated you, I will admit.” Lieutenant Siskind said, “but I have grown quite fond of you ever since you brought back all that data. How in the Hell did you manage that?”


“So you aren’t going to strangle me right now Lieuteant Siskind?” Delfina asked hesitantly.


“Nope. And you can call me Adam.” Lieutenant Siskind said.


“Adam…” Delfina repeated.


“Yes, now tell me, how did you manage to get all that information? Alpha Prime’s location is on there.” Adam asked.


Delfina watched Adam carefully, deeply puzzled by his newfound enthusiasm towards her. Seeing him without his armor was strange enough, but his complete change in demeanor towards her was… unexpected. On the ISI rehabilitation ship she saw nothing but anger and pain in his eyes, misdirected at her, but there all the same. Now, she saw something else in his eyes, enthusiasm maybe? No… hope. He was filled with hope.


“I’m sure it’s all written down somewhere, I’ve been interrogated constantly for the past month apparently.” Delfina said.


“Oh I’m sure the debrief is all over the planet at this point. But I want to hear it from you.” Adam said.


“Okay, I really don’t feel comfortable. What has you so excited and energetic? I don’t believe any of what you are showing is sincere. I think I preferred it when you hated me.” Delfina said.


“Oh I still think you are a terrible being. But you brought back the location of Alpha Prime, because of you we will get to strike right into the heart of the Alpha Empire and kill it. Thanks to you we can finally end this war!” Adam exclaimed, pounding his fist into an open hand. “So I’m a little excited, yes.”


Delfina’s eyes widened at the realization. It seems they finally believed her. At long last. Maybe the war would end. Hopefully. At least a dozen systems remained in Alpha Empire control, filled with millions of people just as misguided as she was.She winced at the prospect of there being others subjected to the same lies and machinations that she had been fed her whole life. It angered her beyond control. And to think of all the senseless slaughtering that could be avoided if the ISI struck directly at Alpha Prime without liberating all the buffer worlds first.


“When are they attacking?” Delfina asked with utter seriousness.


“I don’t know, I’m still going through the final stages of civilian reintegration.” Adam said.


“You don’t know! What is this reintegration?” Delfina asked, clearly irritated.


“It’s the process of turning me back into a civilian. My tour of duty is over. I’ll still be guarding you of course, but that is on a volunteer only basis.” Adam said.


“Alright, whatever. I’d like to be left alone.” Delfina said.


“”As you wish. I’ll be right outside if you need anything.” Adam said, leaving.


Delfina rubbed her forehead with her hand, attempting to understand how she had just ordered a man who had a few weeks ago tried to kill her. Everything was changing quickly once more.


        “Adam before you go,” Delfina said as he neared the door.


        “Yes?” Adam replied.


        “Is there any chance I can get a different guard?” Deflina asked.


        “Ah, still haven’t warmed up to me? Can’t say I’m surprised. I have to respect that.” Adam said.


        “Well?”


        “Nah, sorry. You're stuck with me for now. Noesteea isn’t exactly known for its martial prowess.”


        Delfina laid her head back down and stared at the colorful swirls on the ceiling, listening to the sounds of that infuriating man walk away.


Chapter 19: Resurgence


“We need to go over how to format your responses.” Aesek said, leading her out the main hospital entrance.


“Again?” Delfina said.


“The reports I read about you mentioned you had an abnormal need for gaining power.” Aesek said bluntly.


        “To enact change. But why were you reading my reports? Is there anything that you don’t know about me?” Delfina said angrily.


        “And in order to gain power,” Aesek continued, ignoring Delfina’s questions, “It is very important that you stick to the predisposed way of speaking so you do not reveal too much or influence the people the wrong way. People will like you and will support you” Aesek stressed.


“For the wrong reasons. How can I even influence people the wrong way?” Delfina questioned. “What if I say the wrong thing?”


“Then the conference will be over and you will face severe consequences. There is certain protocol to these events. A specific way to handle interactions with our citizens.” Aesek said.


They walked through the park located in front of the hospital, standing on a long wooden bridge. Two waterfalls cascaded down on either side, causing lilypads to gently bounce around and underneath the bridge. Colorful birds hovered above them, trying to feed on the lily’s nectar. The bridge itself had shade cast down on it from the trees that naturally formed it. Delfina was more keen on feeling the ridges on the rails of the bridge then listening to Aesek.


        “Are you listening to me?” Aesek asked impatiently.


        “Of course. What is it you want me to do?” Delfina said.


        “Remember, it’s all about simplicity. Simple. Simple responses that do not go over anything more than how you felt. Nothing about how you got there, how you got back. Nothing.” Aesek said. “And certainly leave out anything about death. Also, and this is the big thing, the ISI told you to go back to Alpha Prime.”


        “The ISI was ordering me to stay on the ship and get to ISI space.” Delfina said adamantly.


        “No, what you will say is that you were told by the ISI to go to Alpha Prime to gather intelligence.” Aesek said.


        “This is a lie.” Delfina said. “You want me to lie to everyone?”


        “It is for their safety. The people would not like it if you voluntarily chose to leave the ISI. You barely knew anything about the ISI so your decision is vindicated in the eyes of ISI high command. But the people will not really understand this.” Aesek said.


        “I think they should know what actually happened, so they can see how powerful the mental hold the Alpha Empire has on its citizens.” Delfina said.


        “But this would not work out for anyone. It is best if you say nothing of it.” Aesek said, “or we won’t be able to hold the event.”


        What utter nonsense. Aesek was really starting to annoy her. She had been fed so many lies, why would she lie to others? The Alpha Empire used lies to control their people. The ISI could not possibly have had the same mindset.


        They continued walking along the bridge in silence. Aesek was fiddling with a device he held in his hand and communicating with others through it. Delfina ignored him and listened to the continuous flow of the waterfalls. The waterfalls themselves were small enough that they sounded more tranquil than anything else. They were just quiet enough to hear Adam’s boots as he trailed behind them, out of earshot but still close by.
        
        At the end of the bridge was a small stone amphitheatre surrounded by a handful of people waiting patiently on smooth wooden logs. Light shone through the surrounding trees directly on the stone circle, forming a natural focal point for the eye. As Delfina approached the stone, the people around it straightened up and looked at her with anticipation. She carefully stepped onto it and nervously looked at the people all around her.


        “Delfina, welcome. I hope you are comfortable.” A woman said directly in front of her. She sat cross-legged on her natural seat, wrapped in purple linens. She smiled warmly towards Delfina, her eyes radiating energy.


        “This is a bit new for me.” Delfina said cautiously.


        “I’m sure a lot of things are new for you.” the woman in purple smiled.


        “As I’m sure you know, you’ve become quite popular on Noesteea.” the woman continued. “My name is Janeese and I will be conducting this interview with you today. The others you see arrayed around me are many of my colleagues who will assist me in asking you questions in an effort to report exactly who you are and what you have gone through.”


“Okay.” Delfina said. She glanced over at Aesek standing in the corner who mouthed “simple”.


        “I do.” Delfina replied.


        “Good! Now we can begin! I’ll begin by asking you, how do you feel right now?”


        “I feel okay.” Delfina replied.


        “Okay? I’m sure you can elaborate just a little!” Janeese smiled.


        “Well I’m still in a bit of pain from being unconscious for so long…” Delfina started. She looked at Aesek who shook his head and his hand for her to stop. “But I am more confused than anything. So many new things, like this park,” Delfina said gesturing around herself, “or ways of speaking, or even your clothing.” Delfina pointed to Janeese’s clothing.


        “I’ll take that as a compliment.” Janeese smiled and the others chuckled.


        “Do the Imperials not dress as nicely?” Janeese asked playfully.


        “No, they only wear white.” Delfina said.


        “Only wear white.” Janeese repeated, “what a terrible sense of style! I think you’ll find that Noesteea has the best style in all of the ISI. It must be quite a jump! Now I believe Fareen has a few questions for you.”


        Delfina turned to look at a man wearing a blue and yellow tunic with asymmetrical stripes. He cleared his throat and began, “what are your opinions on Noesteea?”


        Delfina thought for a moment before replying, “Well from what I’ve seen, the ISI seems relatively friendly and— ”


        “Excuse me Delfina,” Fareen interjected, “but I meant Noesteea specifically.”


        “Oh,” Delfina stammered, “I haven’t seen much of it, it seems like a productive industrial world.”


        “A productive industrial world? Is that how lowly you think of Noesteea?” Fareen said angrily.


        “I meant that as a compliment.” Delfina replied calmly. “All my life I believed efficiency was the best indicator of a prosperous world.”


        “So, Noesteea is similar to an Alpha world? Is that what you are saying?” Fareen said.


        “Fareen, I think we are derailing a bit.” Janeese said. “Why don’t you tell us instead why you chose Noesteea of all the ISI planets.” 


Delfina glanced at Aesek whose face was red from frustration. He shook is head and waved his hands at Delfina to stop.


“Chose?” Delfina repeated. “Because it was the closest I suppose.”


A different reporter stood up, she wore her long hair tied along the length of her sleeves. She wasted no time delving into her question. “Because it was the closest? Surely you must have chosen Noesteea for our vibrant culture and wonderful people. Or because we sport the most beautiful city in the whole of the Inter Systems Initiative.”


        Delfina glanced at Aesek, who was wordlessly pleading for her to stop. Clearly he didn’t have as much power as it seemed. Delfina looked around at the surrounding reporters, realizing that each and every one of them were looking for ways to glorify their home planet. Pathetic.


        “No. I didn’t ‘choose’ Noesteea for either of those reasons. I didn’t choose Noesteea at all actually. I simply awoke here after surrendering myself to the ISI.” Delfina stated.
        The people around her fell silent as Delfina’s unexpected response sunk in.


        “Do any of you even know who I am? Why I am here?” Delfina added, surprised at their ignorance.


        “You are an Alpha Empire defector, who we assumed wanted to settle on Noesteea.” Janeese said calmly, as if she expected to deflect the mounting tension.


        “I couldn’t care less about this world.” Delfina said, looking into the eyes of every single reporter individually as they collectively gasped.


        “That’s enough!” Aesek shouted. But the reporters ignored him and continued to listen.


        “I came back to the ISI to warn all of you of the impending threat of the Alpha Empire. You probably think this war is already won with ISI superior numbers, but the Alpha Empire is fielding a larger army and greater technology than anyone suspects.”


        “How could you possibly know this!” someone exclaimed.


        “Because I went to Alpha Prime, and I came back.” Delfina proclaimed.


        “Impossible!”


        “Outrageous!”


        “That’s never been done. Never!”


        She heard the voices. Their reactions. They were pleasing to her because it meant they were listening.        “I went to Alpha Prime voluntarily, because I was given a choice and I took it. I chose to go back to the Alpha Empire because that is how deep my devotion was. Even though the ISI exposed who the Alpha Empire are, and just how manipulated and deluded I was, I chose to go back because after so many years being in their service, I couldn’t believe it. I had to see it for myself. And see it I did. Alpha Prime is nothing more than the husk of a planet surrounded by thousands of automated ships, crewed by these so called ‘transcended’.”
“The worst part was I felt just as lifeless as them. The ship I was on was piloted just like the rest of them. No one else stood beside me. I felt cold. Empty and alone. And I could not imagine existence that way. The idea that the conglomeration of machines before me represented the ideal status of the Alpha Empire terrified me.
        “The ideal state for the Alpha Empire is enlightenment through transcendence from flesh into that monstrous computer. I saw them do it. They tried to do it to me. They tried to rip out my spine in order to fuse with it and assimilate everything I knew. And why? For more efficiency? You ask me about how I like your planet, and how I feel about clothing styles or the culture. But none of that matters. What matters is what I found, an entire planet full of enemy ships, filled with an agenda so alien, not even I could hope to comprehend it.”


        Delfina took a deep breath, “So fuck your planet and your pointless praising. We can talk about fashion styles when the Alpha threat has been finally dealt with.”


        She stepped off the stone circle and began heading back towards the wooden bridge. After a brief shock, the reporters scrambled to submit all the data they had just recorded. Aesek collapsed onto the ground, pounding both fists against the soft grass underfoot. A man, dressed in a plain blue tunic and pants quickly approached her..


        “That was very brave Delfina. No matter what happens, know that I’ll be in contact with you soon.” he said in his deep voice. He was much older than any of the other reporters, and his face bore a handful of scars.


        “Who are you?” Delfina asked.


        “Reporter Durev. Ignore these Noesteean reporters using you as a publicity stunt. Go back to your hospital before people start rushing over here. I guarantee you the Noesteeans are not going to like what you said today.”




        “Damn it why did you do it Delfina!” Aesek yelled as she headed briskly past him across the wooden bridge. Adam was right in front of her, setting a fast pace that Delfina could just barely keep up with.


        Durev followed close behind them, and as they stepped off the bridge onto the grassy knoll in front of the hospital several people were already approaching them, yelling all sorts of obscenities at her. One of the broke into a sprint towards her yelling, “you bitch! You Alpha bitch!”


        As the man closed in on her, Delfina stepped back in fear and raised her hands helplessly in front of herself. Right before the furious man reached her, Adam stuck out his arm and struck him in the neck, instantly bringing him down with that swift motion. More people were beginning to arrive from the nearby structures, threatening to overtake them. Adam grabbed Delfina’s arm and ran with her through the hospital entrance and into the safer upper levels. Behind her Durev grappled with two of the enraged people and was viciously pulled into the newly formed angry mob.


        Adam took her to the highest floor of the hospital and rushed her into a completely unoccupied equipment room. Outside and even inside the hospital came the distant shouts of anger and the sound of megaphones calming the citizens down.


        “Damn Noesteean police, takes them forever to do anything.” Adam said in between breaths as he slumped against a wall.


        Deflina stood unmoving in the dark and cramped equipment room, shocked at what just happened.


        “Sit down Delfina, they won’t find us here.” Adam said.


        “I didn’t think the citizens would be so angry.” Delfina finally said, still standing and staring straight ahead.


        “The Noesteeans are a rowdy bunch. Not exactly a fan of you insulting their planet or betraying the ISI. But don’t worry about them. I would have made many worse comments about their planet.” Adam said.


        “Do you think Durev is okay?” Delfina said, turning to look at Adam. Something about that reporter instilled a sense of trust and respect that she reserved for very few people.


        “He’ll be fine, gotten out of many tougher scrapes than this. He’s a very famous reporter from Gleron. Hopefully you get to see it soon, truly a wonderful planet. Nothing like this cesspool.”


        “But everything I’ve seen so far of this planet is good. Except the people I guess.” Delfina said, finally deciding to sit down.


        “Ah, except the people. Like I said, Noesteeans are just terrible. But you haven’t seen anything beyond this little hospital. I assure you this planet is terrible.”
        
        “What do we do now?” Delfina asked.


        “We wait until this blows over.” Adam keyed a few commands into his wrist mounted datapad. “Hopefully one of my friends can let me know what is going on.”


        “And so we wait.” Delfina said.


***


        “I see you were telling the truth about the city.” Delfina said.


        “Told you I wasn’t kidding.” Adam replied unenthusiastically.


        Both of them were in a security tower, specifically designed for high value persons of interest. It was fortified throughout and had a secured entrance that could not be easily breached. At least not as easily as at the hospital she had been shuttled from. Unfortunately, the furniture of the tower was only the bare essential seats constructed out of steel and titanium, to be used as cover in case of a breach. Food was very utilitarian as well; Delfina missed the delicious meals she had on the ISI Rehabilitator ship. During her wait in the tower, she only had a preprocessed omnifood mixture that disturbingly reminded her of her life on Phoenix Station. 
        But what she did have was a commanding view of all of Ganti, Noesteea’s capital city. That would have been a benefit had Ganti not been such a hideous sight. Delfina gazed out at the city. Its streets were completely irregular and seemingly placed for maximum disharmony. Utility pipes and cables rose from the ground, placed above, below and through certain structures before disappearing back into the ground and reappearing at completely random intervals. The structures themselves were a completely mismash of cubic prefabricated structures, bulky residential blocks and bizarre artistic buildings that repulsed the eyes aesthetically.
        The city had an occasional town square between the masses of unappealing structures. These relatively clear areas hosted massive abstract sculptures that protruded at disturbing angles and bore all sorts of contrasting colors. Delfina could spot only a single artistic piece, a bronze statue, that didn’t make her want to gouge her own eyes out.
        The city itself was also covered in colors that had absolutely no relation to one another. Bright, saturated colors made up individual buildings, causing the entirety of the city to visually reek of a toxic miasma. The palace at the center of the city was particularly revolting, bright purples and pinks intersected with orange and lime on the tops of buildings. Even the roads themselves were seemingly colored at random. Looking out at the city made it look like an artistic piece designed to make the beholder squirm.
        The normally ugly industrial outskirts of the city, filled with spaceports and manufacturing centers, seemed like the only regular entity of the otherwise visual cacophony known as Ganti. The industrial ring of manufacturing complexes actually looked decent and formed a border to the gray-yellow dusty plains that stretched out further and further away.


        Delfina shuddered. “How does a city end up so hideous? I don’t see any meaningful reason for this arrangement.”


        Adam laughed, his arms behind his head, laying horizontally across two steel seats. “It’s supposed to be the epitome of artistic expression. I believe that’s what the Baron of Noesteea said at some point. Yeah, epitome or pinnacle I think he said. Of course Ganti is the laughing stock of the Initiative. I mean Noesteea as a whole too, but mainly Ganti.”
 
“And what is so wrong about Noesteea?” Delfina asked, turning to face the all too comfortable Lieutenant Siskind.


“What is so wrong about — did you even look outside?” Adam asked, straightening out and sitting up.


“But this one city may not reflect on the planet. Just as the colors of the buildings may not reflect on the people in them.” Delfina said, thinking back to the golden structures of Lazarus City and the population of Alpha Citizens that once dwelt within them.
        “You’re not wrong about that. But besides their terrible choice in color, Noesteea has nothing going for it. All the other core systems of the ISI have something to be proud of. Gleron, my homeworld so pardon the bias, is the actual pinnacle of civilization. The place is amazing. It’s supposedly the first world.” Adam said.


Delfina watched as Adam became engrossed in explaining what his homeworld was like. His enthusiasm was so unlike the man she had met back on the Rehabilitation vessel heading towards Quella. But also, his statement that Gleron was the first world settled starkly contradicted what Count Lapsus had taught her on Elyisium. She doubted that Count Lapsus was lying to her or was misinformed, yet it also surprised her that Lieutenant Siskind did not mention Earth. She kept her thoughts to herself as Adam continued.


“... the towers, bridges and clear skies. It is a fantastic world, believe me. But anyways, aside from its aesthetic appeal, Gleron serves as the unofficial capital of the ISI. It provides tons of politicians, counselors and almost all rehabilitators. So I, as someone from Gleron, am proud of Gleron’s proud history and contributions to the ISI. Do you see what I mean?”


“I think I am starting to get the point.” Delfina replied.


“Well that is just Gleron, Bryke for example houses the finest military academies in the galaxy and provides more officers for the Initiative’s armed forces than any other world. Not to mention its special forces programs and just the overall renown loyalty and devotion of the Brykeans.”


“Sounds like a charming world…” Delfina said.


“Was that sarcasm I just picked up in your voice?” Adam said.


Delfina said nothing, instead opting to cross her arms and lean against a wall.


“That was, wasn’t it? You are learning fast Delfina. Scary fast.” Adam said. “But where was I, oh yeah... Bryke. It may seem intimidating, and it surely is for us non-Brykeans in the military. But they are usually very kind when not on duty. An interesting people for sure.
“But enough about Bryke, the planet’s Chora and Zefrora, which lie in the same star system by the way, are both famous for their technical programs and the many engineers that come from there. A lot of ISI drone production comes from there. Military as well as non-military drones. Also, Zefroran scientists in particular are famous for creating many technological advances. Not to mention, Zefororan art is actually beautiful because of its inspirations from their thin atmosphere and proximity to a nebula. Nothing like this planet.”


“I’d feel right at home.” Delfina said, not realizing she had just spoken her thoughts out loud.


        “I suppose you might as a researcher, but they aren’t like you Alpha types. They feel the thing that gives them an advantage is trying to stay away from procedural ways of thinking. Instead of thinking… logically I suppose is the word? They try to approach problems in a more holistic and organic fashion.”


        “Please do not call me an ‘alpha type’” Delfina said in a suddenly harsh voice.


        “Sorry, I’ll try not to.” Adam said, raising his hands in a non threatening gesture.


“And I am well aware how the ISI thinks.” Delfina said, her voice returning to normal.


“Are you listening to anything I’ve been saying? The whole point of me telling you any of this is that there is no uniform way that the ISI thinks. Yeah you… uh… I mean the Alpha Citizens think differently than most of the people in the ISI, but don’t think that across seven different planets everyone thinks alike.” 


        “I’ll take it into consideration. Please continue” Delfina said.


        “Well, Oslia is well known for creating some of the finest spacecraft in existence. For some reason they like to stick to carriers, but they also manufacture really large ships like cruisers and even battleships. I heard that they are about to officially finish construction of a dreadnaught that they have been working on, first of its kind. Really a masterpiece of engineering. Also they make a ton of high end civilian ships as well, almost forgot to mention.”


        “I am surprised at how proud you feel of these other worlds accomplishments since you consider yourself Glorian.” Delfina said.


        “I can see how you would think that. But I’m just excited to kick these Alpha bastards out of the galaxy. I think a shiny new dreadnaught will do just the thing.”


        “I hope so too.” Delfina sighed. 


        “Yeah, you, me, and the rest of the ISI.” Adam said. 


He leaned back and starting counting on his fingers. “Which world am I forgetting?” he said to himself. “Oh right! Typhon. Typhon is a hell of a world. It’s got storms like you wouldn’t believe. Makes a normal person shit their pants just at the thought. But the planet’s moons are chock-full of precious metals. The planet is a giant exporter of every sort of precious metal you could ever need.”


        “How is this something to be proud of? It seems all the thing the other planets were proud for were some kind of technological or social achievements.” Delfina questioned.


        “Because just living on Typhon takes a special breed of person. Typhonians are the toughest sons of bitches you’ll ever meet in the galaxy. Damn good miners too.” Adam said.


“So what is Noesteea known for?” Delfina asked finally.


        “That’s the thing, it’s not known for anything. Nothing good anyways. The majority of Noesteeans are civilian freighter crew. They haul stuff between the other planets. The others just operate the insignificant manufacturing industry and whatever else needs doing on this planet. They have nothing going for them and the Noesteeans hate it. That’s why they hate everyone else and seem like total cocks. If you are going to take anything from this conversation, just know that Noesteeans hate people from other worlds, they think we are smug or arrogant for some reason. And they most definitely hate when you call Noesteea a colony. I’ve seem more than one fight start with someone calling Noesteea a colony.”


        “What’s so wrong about calling this planet a colony?” Delfina asked.


        “Because it violates the premise that the world is its own entity. It makes it seem like it belongs to someone else, like the actual colonies of the ISI. It makes them seem insignificant and pointless. Not that they aren’t, but calling them a ‘colony’ surely emphasizes that.” Adam carefully explained.


        A soft rapping came from the reinforced entryway of the room. Adam shot up and carefully walked to it, silently motioning Delfina to stay put. He keyed the door interface and a small hologram shot up showing who was on the other side. “Shit.” he exclaimed.


“Who is it?” Delfina said, fearing angry Noesteeans were there to kill her. “Are they here to kill me?”


“Worse.” Adam replied. “It’s the fucking Baron of Noesteea.”


Delfina realized at once that this was the ruler of the world. Surely she should manage her interaction with him carefully enough to smooth things over.


“Delfina.” Adam said, “things you need to know: he is the dumbass who designed the city. He is a bit of a loony. And he abhors sarcasm. Also he gets offended even faster than you.”


“Hey, I don’t get offended — ” Delfina began to say, clearly offended.


“My point exactly” Adam said as he unlocked the entrance.


The reinforced entryway slid open and the Baron stood on the other side, bristling a smile composed solely of blue teeth. He had on multicolored robes composed of tiny triangles that began reflecting the light as sparkles as he strode forward. In his ruby gloved hands he carried a golden staff.


“You must be the venerated Lieutenant Siskind, protector of our Alpha treasure.” The Baron smiled.


“You are correct.” Adam said with a slight bow.


“And you are the infamous Delfina. Researcher of the Alpha Empire’s doom.” the Baron said as he turned to Delfina with a crooked smile. His metallic blue teeth contrasted sharply against his face, giving the appearance of nightmarish creature. His haunting eyes did nothing to alleviate that feeling, They seemed to see right past her… into her. It was thoroughly unsettling for her. “I am Baron Fraiser, and I have much I would wish to speak with you about. I would ask of you to ask your friend to leave.” he said smoothly while gesturing at Adam.


“I don’t have friends.” Delfina stated, matching the Baron’s gaze.


“Good to know.” Adam mumbled.


“But I would like if Adam remained with me.” Delfina continued. “He has been instrumental in helping me transition to an ISI lifestyle.”


The Baron paused. He looked at Delfina, his smile fading. “Very well, if it pleases you Delfina.” he said with an unmistakable air of annoyance masked by formality.


Baron Fraiser sat himself down, caressing his robes carefully as he did so to keep them from wrinkling. He laid down his golden staff horizontally across his lap and gazed at Delfina, keeping a firm grip on his staff. 
It reminded her of what seemed ages ago when Rehabilitator Eris first observed her. She felt vulnerable. She had learned to mind herself in front of others, no longer relying on the isolation within the vacuum suit. Up until now, she had almost felt confident speaking with others, masking her emotions and thoughts as best she could
But now all that vulnerability from her first meeting with Eris spilled back out and she wished for nothing more than a vacuum suit to cover her face. She’d prefer to message the Baron, and not have to use her voice. Anything to keep her emotions a secret. Lieutenant Siskind constantly reminded her of her weak emotional control. And he was right. And now she was out in the open, feeling more vulnerable than on the frozen plains of Belusia.


        “Tell me Delfina, I yearn to know what you think of Ganti.” The Baron said, studying her as he slowly asked his question. Delfina focused once more on the present situation and glanced at Adam who gave her a “be careful” look.


        “It’s very colorful and filled with… interesting shapes.” Delfina carefully responded.


        “Yes, it is, isn’t it? I find it marvelous. The epitome of artistic expression.” The Baron said, finally looking away from her and towards the city. “I could look all day at the city and never tire of getting lost in the freeform of it all. It was always my dream, to make a world where our emotions can run wild and shape our very surroundings in parallel with our thoughts. I believe I have achieved that.” he said, staring out at the city. “And yet, there are some who do not share these beliefs. I’ve heard some distant rumors that my city is… not perfect. Why do you suppose this is?”


        “I haven’t the slightest idea.” Delfina said, remembering how the phrase could be used to deflect a loaded question.


        “But surely you must! Think, think deep inside that logical mind of yours.” the Count said softly, his words subtly becoming more aggressive.


        “The color scheme is revolting.” Delfina suddenly said, before adding, “just a bit.”


        “And out comes the truth.” the Baron chuckled. “Just a like at the interview. You know I can have you killed?” he suddenly said, all humor from his voice gone..


        “Excuse me?” Delfina’s eyes lit up with scarcely controlled terror.


        He stood up. “I said I could have you killed.” The Baron said, his face suddenly filled with disdain as he looked down on her.


        Delfina said nothing, focusing on the only exit. But while the Baron was speaking to her, a bright orange honor guard had silently taken position near the entrance. Lieutenant Siskind, his face dead serious, stood still near the honor guard, fists clenched by his sides.


        “No response now? Was what I said not revolting Delfina? My Alpha treasure?” The Baron said, walking around the room. He stopped right behind Delfina and leaned in closer with a whisper. “Why did you mock my planet?” He continued pacing and stopped again, this time much further. “What gives you the right!” He shouted.


        Everything in the room was completely quiet. Everything except for Delfina’s heart which pounded loudly in her ears.


        “I did not mean to —” Delfina began.


“Oh but you did!” Baron Fraiser cut her off. “You did and I think you did it to undermine my authority here! Was it another one of the ISI lords that put you up to this! Or do you still pledge loyalty to that disgusting race of computer worshippers?”


Delfina remained silent, trying to control her emotions once more. She clearly saw the honor guard, standing motionlessly with their rifles. The temptation to bludgeon the Baron to death was starting to overtake her. Lieutenant Siskind saw the anger and fear building up in her. His eyes screamed for her to control herself.


“Nothing to say? Hmm? That is fine. You have insulted me and you will stay here. Forever. In this tower. You will be our Alpha Princess that everyone will come to see and maybe then you will finally learn to respect me and this beautiful city.” The Baron said with a smile. “And you.” He said, pointing towards Lieutenant Siskind. “You still stay here with her because you let this happen! Gleron bastard!”


        Delfina couldn’t believe her eyes. Adam leaped toward the Baron lightning fast, pushing aside one of the guards that moved in to intercept him and slammed his fist into the Baron’s surprised face. The Baron flew onto his back, tangled in his precious robes, blood streaming out of his nose. The second guard slammed the butt of his rifle into Adam’s back and he fell onto the ground motionless.


The Baron stood up, rage in his face and tears in his eyes, his nose clearly broken. “I am a god here!” He yelled in pain. “And I am not a merciful god!” He said as he rushed out of the room. “Seal the door, don’t let them out!” Delfina heard him yell distantly. The reinforced doorway slowly slid closed.


Delfina rushed to Adam, who continued to lay motionless. “Lieutenant Siskind!” She yelled.


“Are they gone?” He whispered.


“Yes, are you okay?” Delfina said.


Lieutenant Siskind jumped up and cracked his back and neck. He stretched his arms and let out a deep breath. “That got heated didn’t it?” Adam said.


“It did. Are you okay?” Delfina asked again.


Lieutenant Siskind gave her a look of amusement, “of course I’m fine. I’m a member of the ISI special forces. If I couldn’t take a hit I’d be dead years ago.”


“But I don’t understand, why would you attack and you just fell down motionless!” Delfina exclaimed.


“When you were having your little discussion with the Baron, I made a quick motion towards the honor guard. Both of them raised their hands in defense, not their rifes. So I knew if I clocked the Baron in the face, they wouldn’t shoot me.”


“But then they struck you down…” Delfina said.


“I decided it would better if I didn’t have to take out the guards. It would be pretty hard to get out of, especially on Noesteea. I don’t even know if they have a legal system to be honest. Whatever the case, that conversation had to end.” Adam replied.


Delfina leaned back against a chair, clutching her head. Only now was everything sinking in. “Are they actually going to kill us?” Delfina asked.


“Maybe, maybe not. Hopefully not.” Adam said.


***
        Delfina sat against one of the translucent walls, staring down at the city, attempting to make out individuals going about their lives. She had done the same at Elyisum, but on that planet there was no one to watch. Almost everyone had been keeping their minds trapped in the simulation chambers.


        “Everywhere I go, I’m always waiting.” Delfina said.


        Adam was doing something with the room’s only data terminal, but turned when Delfina spoke.


        “Waiting for what.” Adam asked.


        “To do something meaningful. At least back on Belusia I had a purpose. I routinely made discoveries. Created things of value. Now I sit here, in a tower. I sit here waiting for others to make a decision about me.”


        “It’s not so bad. It’s the only time in my life I haven’t actively been doing something.” Adam said.


        “But it’s not the first time I’ve been in this situation. Everything with the ISI has just been me doing nothing and others questioning me, studying me or altogether ignoring me. I haven’t decided a single damn thing for myself every time I am here.” Delfina said in irritation.


        “Well it’s obvious why the ISI wouldn’t let you, isn’t it?” Adam asked.


        “Because I am a security risk?” Delfina mocked.


        “Certainly. But you specifically can’t go anywhere because you are a prize. Whoever has you has a lot of power.” Adam said.


        “What?” Delfina said, completely caught off guard.


        “You’re a prize, the only person in history to have seen Alpha Prime and lived to tell about it. The only person to voluntarily leave the ISI and come back to it. The Baron wanted to exploit this, but you didn’t let him.”


        “I had no idea.” Delfina said.


        “But it doesn’t matter, because intentional or not, you’ve made yourself a very interesting person. So many people want to know what it was like, what you felt, what you saw.” Adam said.


        “And what sets me apart from the other Alpha converts?” Delfina questioned.


        “Because they didn’t have a choice. There are a lot of planets not part of the ISI. It worries people. But you left and you chose to come back. And that makes you an inspiration. Not to mention that you were a high ranking Alpha citizen. Almost everyone we get their hands on is a lowly worker because the rest blow their brains out before letting us take them in.”


        “So you are saying that I am destined to being a trophy and for others to make decisions for me?” Delfina asked.


        “That depends on you I’m sure. I truly only care because you made the end of this war possible. No offense.” Adam said.


        “I understand.” Delfina said, looking back to the city below absent-mindedly.


        “I do have some good news though!’ Adam said. “I just got a response from one of my friends on Gleron. It seems that the Governor himself is coming here to secure your release.”


        “So I am switching hands again?” Delfina asked, still staring at the streets below.


        “The Governor is a fantastic man. He is the sole reason Gleron is the perfect world it is.”


        Delfina said nothing.


        “Think of it this way, he can’t be worse than the Baron.” Adam said.


***


Chapter 20: Prominence


        Delfina stirred, awakened by a gentle sliding noise. She glanced outside; it was night on Noesteea. The incredibly dark sky confirmed this. And it would remain dark for another sixty hours. This would be her second night on Noesteea, and hopefully her last. She blinked many times, focusing on the thousands of multicolored streetlights of Ganti. At night somehow, the city actually did look charming. The lights blended into various, animated shapes from a distance, and from the security tower, she truly did have the best view.


        The lights within the tower came on. Delfina shot up and fought back a yawn. A figure walked in through the reinforced doors, and Adam immediately stood and saluted. She focused on the figure, a man, sporting a padded tunic and trousers as reflective as obsidian. Around the collar and sleeves of his tunic shone royal blue outlines. His trousers and boots had the same striking outline. He had a glowing stripe on each leg running down to his heavy boots. And in the center of his tunic, the letters I.S.I. were glowing — changing in luminosity and naturally drawing attention.


        “Planetary Governor Vincere! It is an honor sir!” Adam said, maintaining his salute. Delfina was surprised by the sudden shift in formality by Adam. It reminded her all too much of their first encounter on the Rehabilitation ship weeks ago. 


        “At ease Lieutenant Siskind, it is I who am honored. Aside from your highly impressive record during your tour of duty, I am proud to have one of Gleron’s finest maintaining custody of the Alpha Researcher. Having soldiers like you within the ranks of the ISI makes me more confident in our military than a thousand cruisers.”


        “Thank you sir.” Adam said, lowering his hand. Delfina could tell that he was attempting to retain his professional demeanor, but she could also see that he was having trouble suppressing the pride he felt in the Governor’s words.


        “I heard about a bit of a scuffle between you and the leader of this planet.” the Governor said, quieter and graver..


        “I assaulted him after he verbally threatened myself and my charge.” Adam replied without hesitation.


        “I would love to slam some sense into him myself as well, but please do not do it again. Relations with the Noesteeans are strained enough as they are,” the Governor said.


        “Understood sir.” Adam replied.


        “Well then, let’s get moving. Take your charge and follow me.” Governor Vincere ordered.


        Delfina felt hesitant to go, in no small part to the Governor’s insistence that she be called Adam’s “charge”.


        The Governor paused briefly to look at her as he made his way to the door.


        “It is an honor Governor. I am Delfina and I look forward to seeing Gleron.” Delfina said meekly.


        Governor Vincere turned to face her, swept his violet eyes from her boots to her face, finishing his scan with a deep gaze into her eyes. He cocked his head a bit and his own pupils contracted.


        Delfina swallowed nervously and watched Governor Vincere wordlessly exit. Adam began to follow him and Delfina saw that he was as perplexed as she was. But he quickly fell into step beside Governor Vincere leaving Delfina to nervously trail behind. Outside the security room waited a dozen guards lined up on either side of the hallway. Each of them carried a massive fortified shield and holstered assault weapon. With their body armor they were massive, dwarfing even Adam. Each of them had the same ISI color scheme as the Planetary Governor, glowing stripes and all. They mechanically fell into step with the Governor, flanking him closely.


***
        They walked briskly through the colorful streets of Ganti, joined by an entire battalion of the Governor’s personal guard. Except these additional thousand men and women did not carry shields, but instead carried even more powerful assault weapons across their chests. The battalion marched neatly in sync through Ganti, shaking it. A thousand armored footfalls fell in the otherwise quiet night.
        The night air was precariously cold, and Delfina began to shiver. Her ISI jumpsuit was not enough to keep her warm in this increasingly cold night. Without the local star to bathe the surface in its light, nor any sizeable bodies of water to keep the temperature stable, Noesteea became very cold towards the end of its night.
        Delfina tried to keep the cold out of her mind, looking up at the Noesteeans glaring at them from inside their buildings. She did not comprehend why the Governor chose to march his personal guard through the middle of Ganti. She would have opted to use an aircraft or ground vehicle. But she dared not say anything. Even if the Governor hadn’t terrified her moments earlier, the silent marching was so intimidating to her that she wouldn’t dream of breaking the silence.
        As one, the column stopped. A thousand men and women simultaneously stood still. Delfina did not expect the sudden halt and bumped into Adam who gripped her shoulder firmly until she caught balance. He kept his hand on her shoulder and glanced at her, his eyes solemn.


        At the head of the column was Baron Frasier, standing in front of his own infantry battalion on the steps leading to Ganti’s primary spaceport.. He did not wear the flashy attire that Delfina had last seen him in. No, he stood as armored as the rest of Noesteea’s troops, helmet in hand. Delfina looked around, noting the absolute silence of the city. Only she, Adam, Governor Vincere and Baron Frasier did not bear helmets. Only they stood on this cold night with their faces fully visible. Ironic, that now it was Delfina who was exposed and the rest of the ISI who covered themselves.


        “Leaving without saying goodbye Governor?” Baron Frasier called out.


Governor Vincere strode forward, past the relative safety of his personal guard. “I hoped to catch you on the way out. But it was of no consequence either way.” he said.


“No consequence? I’d reckon you know I have something to say about you marching an entire battalion of your renegades through my streets.” Baron Frasier shot back.


“You galavant with your trophy, have her spill all ISI secrets in the hopes of making your world look better and your power seem greater… Baron, you knew very well that I would come personally.” Governor Vincere said, closing the distance between them.


“You… you come and insult me. In my own city!” the Baron cried out at him, his voice echoing through the city.


Governor Vincere closed the few remaining steps between them until they were face to face. “No Baron. You insult yourself, those who you govern and the ISI. Go. Go and pray to Emperor Nikondrius and obstruct my matters no longer.”


The Baron’s face lit with rage. The troops under his command were visibly agitated as well, unable to hold the statue-esque composure of the Governor’s own soldiers.
        But there was something else too. When the Governor mentioned Emperor Nikondrius, Baron Frasier was no longer just infuriated. He suddenly seemed powerless and overtaken by hesitation.


        Planetary Governor Vincere proceeded to stride right past him. Miraculously, the Baron’s forces parted before the Governor. The rest of the ISI battalion proceeded forward in unison to the docked ISI starcruiser ahead of them. Delfina watched a downcast Baron, gritting his teeth and clenching his fists as they passed, muttering incomprehensible things under his breath.


***
        
        “And the Baron of Noesteea just stood there and let him pass?” Durev asked?


        “I swear upon my honor that is exactly how it happened.” Adam said.


        Durev was speaking from a communication device Adam held in his hands. He was already planetside on Gleron, preparing for their arrival. The ISI cruiser Delfina and Adam had left on was making final preparations to land, although they could scarcely tell since Delfina was being kept in the brig. To her surprise, Adam remained with her, and elected to watch over her within the brig himself. They had scarcely had a moment to talk privately before being put in stasis for the phase jump. But after the jump, Adam still said nothing and Delfina did not have the courage or tact to talk about any of the events that transpired. Chiefly, the immense disdain that Planetary Governor Vincere had for her. She slowly began to worry that the Governor’s reservations were beginning to take shape as Adam’s own thoughts towards her. Even still she scarcely trusted him, regardless of his friendly demeanor to her. But she did get used to having someone to talk to, especially after being locked up on Noesteea for so long. But she realized that her only true friend was off on some faraway planet, hopefully faring better than Delfina.
        
        “Do you know of the Governor’s intentions for her?” Durev asked,


        “I have no clue. I was about to ask you the same thing.” Adam replied.


        “It’s strange being so out of the loop on all these recent happenings. You’d think that as a reporter I would have heard news from Noesteea or someone somewhere in high command.” Durev said, scratching his head.


        “Maybe you don’t have as many high up friends as you think.” Adam said.


        “You know damn well I have eyes and ears everywhere.” Durev said. “No… I’m pretty sure Noesteea, or at least Ganti, is under a communication lockdown. Not only that, but I have a feeling the Governor is just winging it right now. That message your Alpha friend put out to the public has caught a bunch of traction. There’s a lot of closed door meetings going on around here. Speaking of your friend, how is she? Is she there with you?”


        “She’s fine. You can talk to her yourself.” Adam said, handing over the screen to Delfina.


        Delfina took the screen from him and saw Durev’s unusually self-assured expression. “There you are Delfina.” he said warmly, “You’ve become a lot more popular since your dip into the truth on Noesteea. I wake up everyday thinking how lucky I was to be there when you said it.” Durev said.


        “Glad to see you made it out okay.” Delfina said, only half genuine.


        “Sounds like you haven’t warmed up to me. That’s disappointing, but why would you? The Alpha Empire treated you like a piece of machinery. The Baron here just wants to showcase you and no one knows what the Governor is up to. Hell, I’d be infuriated at all these people just using you for your knowledge and political leverage.”


        Delfina said nothing but found herself agreeing silently.


        “And worse of all, you have to deal with that stiff goon Adam watching over you constantly. I’d rather have a Typhonian crystal pirate to spend company with.” Durev exclaimed.
        Delfina was still wary, but couldn’t help but smile a bit when Durev mentioned this.


        “Anyways, you’ll get to like me I promise. As soon as you come down here I’m going to make sure that you get treated like a citizen and don’t have to talk to people from the damn brig of a ship.”


        “And what do I have to do?” Delfina said.


        “Speak the truth. Let me share what you truly experienced to the billions of people in the ISI.” Durev said.


        “And so you are just like all these others you just mentioned trying to use me?” Delfina said, suddenly no longer feeling so charmed.


        “Absolutely I am. You are a special person now Delfina, there is no getting past that. Now it matters how you use your influence. You have to understand just how limited our communications are as of recently. A decade ago, I could send a message anywhere in charted space if I so desired. Now, no one sends anything without specific authorization. I used to be on the front line you know. Saw the combat, explosions, guts and all. Even got to record it sometimes and show people back here what the battles so far away actually looked like. But those are the days of the past, now everyone is in the dark. Informationally speaking anyways. But then there was a glimmer of light.”


        “Me.” Delfina said.


        “Exactly,” Durev replied. He continued on in a starkly graver tone, “you stay on your toes Delfina. You’ve made a lot of waves with your outburst, and somehow people found out about you heading back to the Alpha Empire. That means that Vincere cannot silence you without major backlash. But you’ve also proven a major liability, and I know that Vincere hates liabilities.”


        The screen went blank and Delfina handed it back to Adam, who stared outside the ship through a viewscreen and didn’t avert his gaze. Delfina wondered if Adam was now someone Durev was warning her about.


***


        “Everything you say will be recorded and edited before being released to the public. No more outbursts.” the communications manager said to Delfina.


        This was the fourth time she was being recorded, and every time some director, or manager or officer in charge of communications would tell her that. It didn’t matter what she said. Durev showed her the edited footage and it twisted everything she said into a more suitable, neutral message. Governor Vincere kept ordering her to do these broadcasts and she had no choice but to comply.
        At first she spent most of her time arguing for an immediate ISI invasion of Alpha Prime. But those conversations were cut in their entirety. Anything that made the ISI seem fallible was immediately overturned.
        She then tried to switch topics abruptly mid-recording, so that it would prove nonsensical if the video footage was cut. But somehow the producers edited the footage so it seamlessly omitted all of Delfina’s pleading for an invasion. All that remained was her speaking of her experiences aboard the ISI Rehabilitator ship and her life back on Phoenix Station. Pointless information.


        Delfina walked into the spherical recording room and stood in the center, mustering the bravest face she could. She would not let the ISI cut out her message. According to Durev, her recordings were being broadcast throughout the colonies as a message of support for the Rehabilitation programs and as proof that the ISI was winning the war against the Alpha Empire. Millions of people were listening to her, as no former Alpha citizen was of such interest to the public before. Her disappearance and reappearance, coupled with her journey to Alpha Prime sparked too much interest before ISI censors could mute communications.


        Which all culminated in one thing. She would no longer be a puppet. She had spoken to Durev. It was time to enact her plan.


        The ISI Lies. She thought to herself.


        The doorway she came through closed to form part of the sphere. Omni directional lights came on and optical instruments located at all angles within the sphere came online with the faintest of hums. Delfina took a deep, steadying breath, steeling her resolve and working as best as Durev taught her to maintain a neutral expression. Not telling Adam was nagging at her conscious, but she would have to endure. She couldn’t trust him since their meeting with Vincere.


        The ISI Lies.


        “Greetings Delfina, from Gleron and the rest of the ISI!” a friendly broadcaster’s voice came from every direction.


        Delfina paused for a moment, thinking. Her eyes lit up and she responded with a pleasant smile. “Today is a good day for an interview!”


        “Absolutely it is! It’s like you can read my mind! I’m Simon by the way, and I’ll be conducting part two of Initiative Net’s foray into your life. So far you have told us of the daily ordeals involved with being such a high level researcher, and the stresses that came with it.”


        “Have to say, that sounds about right.” Delfina answered politely.
        
        “Well, what the people really want to know is how did it feel? What was going through your mind during the years of working together so closely with your team?” Simon asked, his voice filled with exaggerated concern.


        Delfina put a finger on her lip, thinking. “Everyone I meet here always wants to know how it felt. And you know what? No one once asked me how I felt in the decades I spent with the Alpha Empire. Thirty years I spent on Phoenix Station, working as hard as I could. And the only time anyone would care how you felt was if you broke down and stopped responding.”


        “Terrible to think no one cared about you.” Simon said.


        “I agree. But to answer your question, I felt alone. Truly alone. The other team members worked with me day in and day out, but to this day I don’t know what any of them look like. Well except one…” Delfina said, her voice the tiniest bit unsteady.


        “Except one?” Simon reiterated.


        “Saying it out loud still sounds strange, but I was reunited with one of my team members on the Rehabilitation ship. And I saw her face.”


        “Really? I’m at a loss of words to describe how much I, and the rest of the ISI want to know. What was that like!” Simon asked excitedly.


        “Intense...” Delfina stated.


        “Go on!” Simon said.


        “Like waking up from a dream. Although I must admit, I have begun to dream only recently. As you are aware, I used stasis chambers heavily all my life and I never once recalled dreaming in them.” Delfina said.


        “What more can you tell us?” Simon asked.


        “I… I still have to figure out exactly how I feel about seeing her again. She reminds me all too much of my former life.” Delfina admitted.


“But I sense there is something else too it.” came Simon’s voice, gently prodding her.


Delfina opened her mouth to say something. Mid thought she realized she was straying from the plan. Panic seeped in and she immediately felt her face flush. How could she have been so simple minded to let this discussion carry her on.


“I hope I am not delving too deep.” Simon said.


Delfina smiled and composed herself, thinking fast how best to resume the conversation. “Each and every day I think about her. She is the only connection I have left to my old life and, I always felt a connection with her. She is the only person I have ever missed.”


“Truly fascinating. Thank you for shattering the common preconception of former Alpha citizens being heartless. I’m sure I speak for everyone listening when I say, I hope you reunite soon.”


One more line. That’s all she needed to say. 


The ISI lies.


“Seriously, I thank you and the rest of the ISI for being so welcoming to me here. You’ve let me experience true joy for the first time.” Delfina said.


“Farewell.” came Simon’s voice.


Delfina wordlessly waved goodbye to the empty sphere. She assumed it would look natural when people were watching.


The lights came on and the door into the sphere slid open once more, providing a clear exit. Durev waited for her, alongside the previously curt communications director


“That was a great job Delfina. I’m glad you finally came around and delivered such a powerful interview. I think you’ll find if you work with us things will begin going in your favor.” the communications director said.


Durev smiled and kept his hands in his pocket, waiting for the other man to finish speaking. As soon as the conversation ended, he politely locked his arm with Delfina’s and escorted her outside into a warm Gleron day. Delfina noticed the trio of guards that usually followed her around did not follow them outside. Instead Durev strode forward, still smiling.


“I think we are out of earshot now.” Durev finally said.


“Did it work?” Delfina asked, her eyes filled with worry.


“Only time will tell, but that was a hell of a delivery. Were you short for words or actually feeling emotion?” Durev asked her.


“Don’t joke.” Delfina said.


“No really, it was hard to tell.” Durev said.


“I almost forgot the plan. I was two seconds away from ruining it.” Delfina admitted quietly.


“Today,
Have,
Everyone,
I,
Saying,
Intense,
Like,
I,
Each,
Seriously.


The ISI lies. You pulled it off.” Durev said. “I already told all of my associates to be on the lookout for hints. With any luck they will spread the message subtly through the ISI’s censors. The real question is if the ISI censors will be dumb enough to let your message through.”


“I really hope.” Delfina said with a sigh. “It’s about time I finally do something outside of the ISI’s control.”


“By the way, Delfina, did you mean what you said about that one Alpha crew member?” Durev asked in an unusually timid voice.


“About Dana? Every word.” Delfina said.


“Huh. I had no idea.” Durev muttered.


“And you are going to take me to her.” Delfina continued.


 “What? Delfina they literally just released you. You can’t just leave Gleron. You won’t get to send a message if you do!” Durev said.


“People are going to find out what I did one way or another. When Vincere finds out I’m staying here forever. I know he hates me already. I can’t even imagine his reaction if this message gets through.”


Durev said nothing. He just looked at her, his face crass.


“I’m not sure where your enthusiasm went. I need to go see Dana. She’s the only reason I made it back here. Plus it fits well with the narrative of me having a soul as Simon put it. He’s the nicest interviewer I’ve had so far by the way.” Delfina stated.


“Well he’s not real.” Durev said bluntly.


“Excuse me?” Delfina said.


“He’s an interview script. Just a subroutine. Not a real person.” Durev said.


“Durev, what’s going on? I sense you becoming hostile.” Delfina said.


Durev swallowed and forced a smile. “I’m sorry. The… trip is a lot to process. I’ll make the arrangements.”


“Thank you.” Delfina said.


“In the meantime, you should come with me back to my apartment. I’m not sure how long it will take to make the arrangements. Unless you have somewhere else to go?” Durev said quickly.


“You know this planet is as alien to me as anything I’ve ever experienced.” Delfina said. “I’ll go with you.”


“Marvelous, I’ll call in a taxi immediately.” Durev said.


“Where is Adam? He was going to meet us here.” Delfina asked, spotting a descending taxi in the sky.


“He decided not to come.” Durev said.


“Really? I can’t say I’m surprised, but he did come to all my other interviews.” Delfina said.


“He’s started getting distant with me as well. Returning to his former self.” Durev said.


“I didn’t like him before.” Delfina said, her first interaction with Adam all too familiar.


“He was a lot harder to understand… but what you have to understand is the Governor Vincere means the world to that man. Meeting him for the first time and having him show such disdain for you… it has to be messing with him.” Durev said.


“I suppose you are right.” Delfina frowned. “Did you tell him of our plans here?”
“No. I wasn’t sure if we could trust him.” Durev said.


Strange. Delfina found it hard to believe that she now trusted Durev more than Adam. Every day she understood just how complex and unpredictable human interactions were. On rare occasions she positively thought back to her time as an Alpha Researcher. But she was at the moment. Specifically reminiscing about how straightforward interactions were with other people. Just basic data transfer.


“Then we better keep going. Keep an eye out if this story catches wind.” Delfina said.


“Keep an eye yourself,” Durev said, handing her a datapad. “It automatically connects to whatever planetary information repository it can. It’s not linked to you but don’t search for anything suggestive of what we did here since all queries are collected and stored in search logs.”


        Delfina’s eyes grew wide. Finally, she had access to Gleron’s data repository. Essentially all the information ISI citizens had access to. Immediately she search up Dana. And then just as quickly herself…


        She was becoming very well known within the ISI.


***


Chapter 21: Pain


        “Delfina wake the Hell up!” Durev yelled from across his house.


        Delfina bolted upright, orienting herself. She looked around in the darkness of Durev’s house, wondering why he had shouted.


        Durev Burst in the room, still fastening a shirt with one hand and reading off a datapad with the other.


        “What is it!” Delfina asked, completely unsure of what he was doing.


        “Durev finished buttoning his shirt and tossed the datapad at the foot of the bed. “Look.” He said before grabbing something from a drawer and disappearing back out the door.


Delfina rubbed her eyes and took a look at the datapad. It was a program logging the occurrences of certain words communicated through official ISI channels. Her gaze went to the top of the chart. She rubbed her eyes in disbelief. She couldn’t be seeing right. But there it was.


THE ISI LIES. 56 million transmissions. The exact number grew so quickly it soon became 57 million.


“Delfina get ready! They’ll be coming for you!” Durev yelled from the other room.


Delfina flew out of bed and wasted no time getting on proper ISI civilian attire. She grabbed the datapad, splashed some water on her face and followed Durev outside. He headed to the edge of his house through a slightly overgrown path.


“Are we waiting for a taxi?” Delfina asked.


“No. Taxi’s won’t drive you anymore. You’ve been locked out of the system.”


Durev reached a tree and slammed one of its branches. A small air transport seemingly materialized out of thin air.


“I always kept it for a situation like this.” Durev grinned and hopped inside.


        She jumped in and the transport lurched forward and upward, squeezing her in the chair.


        “Sorry, no time for caution!” Durev yelled above the wind.


        “Did the transport arrangements work out?” Delfina yelled.


        “Yeah, but it doesn’t matter now!” Durev yelled back. “You are going aboard a merchant vessel as a last minute technician! The pilot owes me a favor and I think now’s a damn good time to cash it in!”


        “What the hell is cash?” Delfina asked.


        “Don’t worry about it!” Durev yelled.


        The sun was gradually starting to rise, illuminating the forested valley speeding past them far below. A smaller town came into view, nestled on the cliffs overlooking the valley. The aircraft descended onto a landing platform flanked by massive merchant ships. Drones were busy ferrying cargo on board and crew members carried out last minute flight checks.
        The second their aircraft touched down, Durev and Delfina hopped out of the transport and sprinted towards a particularly bulky ship painted ISI teal blue with dual gray stripes running on its flanks. A pilot ran out of the ship. She took off her flight helmet and stood erect with her hands on her hips.


        “What the hell is the rush? I don’t even have all my cargo on board.” she said sternly.


        “I’ll explain on board, but all you need to know is Initiative gunships are enroute.” Durev said, motioning for Delfina to enter the docking tube.


        The pilot stuck her hand out, motioning for them to stop.


        “Initiative gunships? I’m not in a rush to get my license suspended Durev.” she said.


        “I told you we need to go.” he replied urgently.


        “Explain that to him.” the pilot pointed to a figure that exited the ship.


        “I can’t let you two leave.” Adam said, a standard issue sidearm in his hand, pointed at Durev.


        “Adam!” Delfina gasped.


        “What are you doing Adam? You understand why we have to leave right?” Durev said.


        “No Durev. I don’t” Adam said, his gaze as frosty as his voice.


        “We need to get Delfina out of here or she won’t ever see daylight again. They might even execute her! Let us go man!” Durev pleaded.


        “She knowingly broke ISI regulations. I cannot help her with that.” Adam replied cooly.


        “I also broke regulation when I worked on a top secret Alpha Empire project, and again by declaring my allegiance above Elysium. Until recently I was actually your enemy. Officially and unofficially.” Delfina said, stepping up to Adam, ensuring that her face was centered in front of his sidearm.


        “Yet that didn’t bother you at all somehow.” Delfina said.


        “This is different,” Adam replied, as calm as ever.


        “No. This is actually much less severe. I conducted an interview and let the listeners know the ISI was lying. And that’s not all I’m going to tell them. As soon as I’m off world I’m going to find a way to convince the ISI to launch a full invasion on Alpha Prime.”


        Adam said nothing.


        “And I know that is exactly what you want Lieutenant Siskind.” Delfina said.


        “It is.” Adam replied, his pistol still trained at her forehead.
        “And yet here we are. All because Vincere doesn’t trust me.” Delfina said.


        “Governor Vincere. And he reminded me of what you are.” Adam said. “An Alpha citizen. An alpha type. Irredeemable.”
        
        “If you are so sure then you best pull the fucking trigger Adam.” Delfina said, her muscles tensing and her nostrils flaring. “I didn’t choose to be in the goddamn Alpha Empire or to slave away without even knowing what my team members faces looked like! Like it matters now anyways as all of them are dead except the one I want to see. Is that too inhuman for you? For me to want to end this damn war and prevent what happened to me from happening to anyone else?”


        “Spreading lies about the ISI isn’t the way!” Adam yelled back, his grip beginning to tremble.


        “Lies! I told people the truth. I don’t care what you think about Vincere. He is consciously opposing an invasion of Alpha Prime. He is knowingly putting the whole of the ISI in danger. If I don’t spread this message… who will? Who will rally the support for attacking Alpha Prime?” Dana yelled, her voice hoarse and her eyes holding back tears. “This is my destiny Adam. This is what I have to do. Let me finally have control of my own life. Just this once.”


        “He has to have a reason.” Adam whispered to himself. “He has to…”


        He lowered the gun slowly. His face strained by emotion and thoughts. Durev motioned to the pilot who ran on board and initiated launch procedure. Durev walked over to the transit tube connecting the ship, waiting for Delfina.


        “Delfina…” Adam said. “I lost everything to the Alpha Empire. Everything. Promise me that if I let you do this… promise me you won’t fail.”


        Delfina walked over to Adam and put an arm on his shoulder. He looked at the ground, his willpower completely gone. “I promise.” Delfina said and she moved in to embrace him. The human contact that had previously felt so alien to her, and shared only between her and Dana suddenly felt so natural. She just now realized just how broken Adam was. It was overwhelming how much a man she viewed as immovable as a stone was actually deeply, totally broken. An embrace was all she could do for him now. But if Alpha Prime was destroyed, then maybe he would recover.
        Delfina let go slowly, looked Adam one last time in the eyes and ran up the docking tube which immediately retracted.


        “I know that must have been hard.” Durev said, putting his hand reassuringly on her shoulder.


        “It was. I… I need to be alone right now.” Delfina replied.


        Nothing was certain. Nothing but her will to end the Alpha Empire, one way or another.


***


        Delfina’s eyes opened and immediately she saw the inside of a stasis tube. For the briefest of moments she worried about the impending ISI invasion fleet and her project on Phoenix Station.


        The tube opened and she climbed out. Durev stood at the end of the crew chambers.


        “Welcome to Quella,” he smiled.


        “What has you in such a good mood?” Delfina asked. Stasis travel always left the occupant feeling immensely hungover.


        “Nothing particularly.” Durev said, still gazing at her.


        Delfina noticed him eyeing her up and down and immediately felt self-conscious. She looked for her clothes. “Please don’t look at me like that.” she said.


“Like what?” Durev replied defensively.


“Like, at all. You are making me uncomfortable.” Delfina said, slipping on a jumpsuit.


“Just wanted to tell you it seems we are in the clear. ISI hasn’t tracked us here as far as I know.” Durev said on his way out.


Delfina put on her boots, her hands shaking a bit. She was finally going to see Dana again. The realization just dawned on her and she had no idea how to feel about it. Terrified. Anxious. Ecstatic. Nothing really described the tempestuous emotions raging inside her. Well maybe nausea described how she felt.
Delfina put a hand over her mouth, trying to keep what little food was in her stomach down. Nausea was not unusual after being put into stasis. Coupled with her anxiety concerning Dana… she just barely kept everything together.
        She stood up, straightened out her jumpsuit, and headed to the flight deck.


        ***


        “Arc hangar 7, this is Gray Typhoon requesting landing clearance.” the pilot said.


        Delfina stood behind her, looking at the gray sphere quickly approaching. Quella was clearly a smaller planet. No atmosphere, or life from the looks of it. Not exactly the most pleasant of colonies. It was easy to take oxygen for granted.


        The pilot punched in a flight pattern and relaxed back in her chair, stretching her arms and yawning. One of her arms brushed against Delfina’s chest. Both of them recoiled.


        “For fucks sake!” the pilot said, turning around.


        “I’m sorry. Didn’t mean to startle you.” Delfina said.


        “Just… announce your presence or something. I’m Jessica.” the pilot said.


        “Hi Jessica, I am Delfina.”


        Jessica leaned back, crossing her arms and cocked her head. “So you are Delfina? I heard you don’t like my home planet.”


        “Which one?” Delfina answered without hesitation.


        “‘Which one?’” Jessica laughed, “I respect your bluntness. Everyone’s so full of mock politeness nowadays. I’m from Noesteea.”


        “Oh. I did say some upsetting things about the planet.” Delfina said. “My apologies.”


        “Don’t apologize. You said everything these people needed to here. People are dying brutally every day on a dozen worlds by the thousands and all they want is a little ego boost. Good riddance. I thank the stars every day I made it off that planet.” Jessica said.


        “I’m glad you feel that way.” Delfina said.


        “Doesn’t mean I don’t have a Noesteean temper so don’t cause anymore trouble than Durev already did. I’m looking to become a logistics officer, not lose my pilot’s license.” Jessica said.


        “You don’t like flying?” Delfina asked.


        “Flying’s great, traveling to different worlds is great, but I’m done with that. I’ve had enough run ins with pirates and Alpha ships alike. Also the small chance that I’ll never emerge during a phase jump keeps me up at night.” Jessica said.


        “So you are scared?” Delfina questioned.


        “Hell no! I just want some stability in my life and lead a life alongside people I love. The loneliness gets to you out here. It’s not unheard of for career merchant pilots to lose their shit and go straight to a psych ward. Only a rehabilitator can help them then.” Jessica mused.


        “You have rehabilitators for more than just alpha citizens?” Delfina asked.


        “Of course, my friend the researcher. It’s just a title. A hard earned title at that, rehabilitators have to invest decades before earning the right to become one. They keep society sane.” Jessica explained. “Or try to. I find them unnerving and incredibly arrogant.”


        “And what was that about not emerging from a phase jump?” Delfina asked.


        “I’ve been studying the math behind a phase jump for most of my life and I still only half understand it. But I know for certain that if the planck counter skips ahead, and quantum particles tend to do that, it could be thousands of years before you emerge from phase and it won’t be where you wanted to. I thought you were a researcher? How do you not know this?” Jessica asked.


        “I worked on communications and encryption not star drives.” Delfina said indignantly. “But I did phase consciously once.”


        “Well shit. I’ve never met anyone who’s done it. How long were you out?” Jessica asked, not bothering to hide how impressed she was.


        “A hundred twenty seven days.” Delfina replied.


        “I’m surprised you didn’t fly over the cuckoo's nest then. That’s a hell of a long time.” Jessica said. “What was it like?”


        “You’re starting to sound like the interviews on Gleron.” Delfina sighed.


        “I can’t think of a greater insult. But I am doing you the courtesy of transporting you illegally and not reporting you, so the least you could do is tell me.” Jessica stated.


        “It was senseless. Literally I could feel nothing. I imagined it almost felt like being dead. All I could do is think and even then I felt myself gradually slipping without stimuli. It was an eternity.” Delfina said.


        “About that death part… I’ve read some research suggesting that phasing and death may be related. Well not phasing per say… or death… but that our souls are separate from the mind. It’s why we can phase consciously when nothing else works. I even read a hypothesis that everytime we go into total stasis we die and a different conscious takes over when we wake.” Jessica said.
        “I hope that’s not the case, otherwise I would have died hundreds of times already.” Delfina said.


        “You and me both. As a pilot I try not to think about these things but they are fascinating.” Jessica said.


        Suddenly Durev’s voice came from behind them. “I see you two are getting along wonderfully.” 


        Jessica turned to him. “Say what you want Durev, this is the last favor. No amount of media coverage is worth breaking ISI code. Plus I had to leave an actual technician on Gleron to make Delfina’s coming on board look legitimate. Thank the stars we didn’t have any trouble in engineering today.”


        “I’m glad you came through.” Durev said.


        “Gray typhoon, you are clear to land in pre approved hangar. Maintain approach speed.”


        Jessica punched in a separate command and turned back around.


        “If you aren’t flying the ship, why is a pilot needed at all?” Delfina asked.


        “Oh boy. I’m going to grab my equipment.” Durev said, heading out of the cockpit.


        “I didn’t mean to cause offense.” Delfina said.


        “Don’t worry about it. It’s because the ship doesn’t have enough intuition in case of an emergency. Traveling through empty space is one thing, but around planets so much shit can go wrong that you need a hotshot pilot like me to keep the situation under control.” Jessica said.


        “Why not just predefine every single possible emergency into the flight computer?” Delfina asked.


        “Because new types of emergencies arise every day sweetheart.” Jessica said. “But it also has to do with the ISI outlawing Artificial Intelligence after the Alpha Empire split.”


        “Split?” Delfina asked.


        “How many damn questions do you have Delfina? Do yourself a favor and stop worrying about all those things.” Jessica said before she looked past Delfina, making sure Durev was gone. “You should spend more time worrying about Durev.” she added.


        “Durev? What do you mean by this?” Delfina asked perplexed.
        “Don’t blow this out of proportion honey,” Jessica said, “but he has a thing for former Alpha girls. At least I hope it’s limited to former.”


        “A thing?”


        “An affinity,” Jessica clarified.


        “Well he seems friendly enough.” Delfina said, still confused. “I don’t mind him having an affinity for me.”


        “Even a sexual one?” Jessica asked.


        “Sexual? What… I… is that what you meant by affinity?” Delfina asked, visibly flustered.


        “That’s exactly what I mean. I think he’s got it bad for you. Just keep that in mind when talking with him. People start to do irrational things when they find one another attractive.” Jessica said.


“I don’t know what to say. I’ve never thought of anyone sexually. Although I have to admit it’s been harder since I joined the ISI. I think I was fed hormone suppressants when I was with the Alpha Empire.” Delfina said.


        “This is the exact reason why he is into you. So clueless. But you really haven’t thought of anyone sexually ever?” Jessica asked, a bit surprised.


        “Well, I think once. But at the time there were so many emotions running through my mind that they weren’t particularly geared towards procreation.” Delfina said.


        “Procreation? Please do not use that word again Delfina! But anyways, who is this person?” Jessica said.


        “I don’t feel comfortable sharing.” Delfina said.


        “Is it me?” Jessica smiled.


        “No, no!” Delfina exclaimed.


        “You don’t have to be so adamant about it! People like being desired I hope you know.” Jessica said.


        Delfina glanced outside the cockpit. The ship was nearing the end of its descent. Their conversation would soon be over.


        “It’s one of my team members from the Alpha Empire.” Delfina said.


        “And how do you feel about this person now?” Jessica said.


        “I don’t know. I really want to see her but I’m feeling scared for some reason and I can’t logically explain it.” Delfina complained.


        “Don’t fear. That’s a hardwired and very human response when you really like someone. Just be honest with this person next time you see them.” Jessica said.


        “I think I’ll see them within the hour.” Delfina said.


        “Oh dear. Best of luck when you talk to her. I hope she feels the same way Delfina. Everyone deserves at least one person to love them back.” Jessica said. “Now if you excuse me, I have to land this bulky bastard in one piece.”


***


        “You’ve touched your hair for the fifth time now.” Durev said.


        “I haven’t noticed. I feel… strange.” Delfina said. “When I do see her, I’ll most likely want some time alone with her. I hope you understand.”


        “Yeah I understand. I see how much she means to you if you are this nervous.” Durev said.


        Both of them waited in front of a residential block housing all former Alpha citizens. Everything around them was gray, manufactured from the same material as the moon. It made the world feel very unwelcome. The lights seemed a bit too bright and the artificial gravity was stronger in some places than others.
        She imagined this moment hundreds of times since she last saw Dana, but never imagined it in such a drab place like Quella. Everything was underground and artificially illuminated. She always imagined a grassy pasture or even a cityscape, but nothing to utilitarian. It felt almost like Phoenix Station. A terrible place to reunite with Dana.
                
        Lost in thought, Delfina scarcely noticed the door slide open in front of them to reveal Dana standing behind. Delfina could scarcely process what was happening before she and Dana embraced. She held onto Dana’s blonde hair, gripping her as tightly as she could. A tear slid down her cheek. Finally, she had made it back to Dana.
        After what seemed like an eternity of bliss they let go, both of them taking a step back and staring into each other’s eyes. Dana grabbed Delfina’s hands. Delfina looked down and noticed Dana had her arm fully regrown.


        “Your arm…” Delfina said.


        “Your hair!” Dana smiled.


        “We have so much to talk about.” Delfina laughed.


        Dana looked expectantly at Durev, still standing beside Delfina.


        “I’m Durev, I’ve been helping Delfina out recently.” Durev said.


        “Pleasure to meet you.” Dana said, leading them inside. “Please take a seat anywhere.”


        “Actually,” Durev said, looking from Delfina to Dana, “I have a bit of business to take care of first. I’ll leave you two to talk.”


        “Come back whenever you need to, we have spare rooms here.” Dana said.


        Delfina sat down on a particularly plush sofa. Dana hopped right beside her, her eyes alight with excitement.


        “I’ve missed you so much Dana.” Delfina said.


        “I’ve missed you too! I’ve been hearing rumors here and there of you traveling the galaxy.” Dana said.


        “I just, I needed to see you. Everything, no matter where I go is so unfamiliar and I can’t depend on anything. People keep changing and I never know what to do. I barely made it to this planet to see you. It’s all I’ve been wanting to do since we parted.” Delfina confessed.


        “Since you left me.” Dana said, her excited tone a bit more stiff.


        “I am so sorry Dana.” Delfina said, dread building within her. “It was too much for me to accept things as they were.”


        “Was it worth it?” Dana asked.


        “I saw Alpha Prime. I saw it for the soulless monstrosity the Alpha Empire really is. I got ferried from ISI planet to ISI planet. I phased consciously… no it wasn’t worth it!” Delfina cried out. “I’ve regretted that decision every second of every day. But I did what I did.”


        “I forgive you.” Dana said unexpectedly. “Looking back I’m just happy you didn’t do anything more rash. The rehabilitation was tough and I understand that now. I never even realized you went through it alone.”


        “Thank you.” Delfina said. “It means everything to me to hear you say that. I was so scared you wouldn’t forgive me.”


        “We may not have known each other intimately for long, but we’ve spent decades together. Most of our lives. Even behind the mask I knew you. I’m just happy we are here, together... now.” Dana said, biting her lip.


        “Yes. Right now. It’s all that matters.” Delfina said, gazing into Dana’s eyes. Dana sat cross-legged next to her, looking brilliant with her long blonde hair and her kind face. Delfina felt her heart pounding. She was still having trouble believing Dana was in front of her. Delfina felt almost a magnetic pull toward her. She couldn’t even think about how she felt. She just did.
        Delfina put her hands on Dana’s knees and leaned forward, Dana leaned forward to and their lips met in a slow, passionate kiss. It felt like pure magic. The kiss overrode everything else and all Delfina could focus on was how wonderful her lips felt against Dana’s. She took her arms from Dana’s knees and put one around the small of her back, the other on her thigh. Dana allowed herself to lightly fall on her back and uncrossed her legs. Delfina followed her down, their lips never parting.
        Dana rolled off the couch and onto the ground, bringing Delfina down and ending up on top of her. She stopped kissing Delfina and started making her way to Delfina’s neck where she bit her lightly, her hand making its way to Delfina’s chest where Dana grabbed her breast.
        Delfina inhaled sharply, quivering as Dana squeezed her breast, relishing her lips on her neck. She could feel herself getting wet; an intense throbbing sensation from between her legs that she had never felt so passionately before. Dana continued to kiss her neck, moving lower, unzipping Delfina’s jump suit with her free hand and slipping her other hand underneath it to touch Delfina’s breast without any obstacles. She teased Delfina by pinching her nipple and as soon as Delfina’s jump suit was half off, she licked it using only the tip of her tongue. Delfina arched her back and dug her fingernails into Dana’s back. Suddenly Delfina realized that Dana still had her cloth tunic on and ravenously pulled it off. Dana lifted her head and arms up and Delfina pulled her tunic over her head, revealing Dana’s breasts, begging for her to squeeze them. Dana remained on top of Delfina, straightening her back and letting her hair loose out of her bun. Delfina grabbed onto her breasts and squeezed them, marveling at how natural her hands felt encompassing them. Dana closed her eyes and let out a brief moan.
        Dana opened her eyes again, moved in close to Delfina and whispered in her ear.


        “You’re going to love this.”


        Dana began kissing Delfina’s neck, moving lower in between kisses. She kept her hands on Delfina’s hips, pulling her jumpsuit down slowly. Dana was at Delfina’s belly now, driving Delfina insane with anticipation. She gripped the edges of the couch, shaking and breathing in ragged breaths as Dana made her way down and spread her legs, ripping the rest of Delfina’s jumpsuit off, leaving her entirely bare.
        She felt Dana’s fingers rub between her legs, driving her into ecstasy. She knew she would remember today for the rest of her life.


***


        Delfina lay next to Dana, curled up in Dana’s bedroom, holding each other. Delfina still couldn’t believe what just happened. She knew the mechanics behind it of course. The hormones that were coursing through their bodies and their makeup. Even the psychological and physiological reactions she was thoroughly aware of as a scientist.
But experiencing them! Nothing could have prepared for how good Dana made her feel. She tried her absolute best to reciprocate. She didn’t do nearly as good a job as Dana, but she could tell that she made Dana feel good too. And that made Delfina happy. Perhaps happier then when Dana was pleasing her.


Delfina consciously decided to stop thinking at that moment. Instead she focused on the warmth she felt laying next to Dana, sliding her fingertips across Dana’s smooth skin. If only she could be locked in this moment for an eternity. Pure unbridled bliss that would be.
She continued to lay next to Dana, content and comfortable.


Delfina’s datapad played a notification sound causing her to flinch.


“What is it?” Dana asked.


Delfina slid to to the foot of the bed, seizing the datapad. Durev was calling her. She answered, but made sure to leave only audio transmission. She didn’t like the way Durev looked at her when she was naked.


“Delfina, how is your meeting going?” Durev asked, she could see him but he could not see her.


        “Very well.” Delfina replied


        “Okay, that’s good. Good.” Durev replied, looking unsure of what to say. “Can I return then?”


        “We — I’m taking a nap now. It is not the best time.” Delfina replied.


        “You… you’re taking a nap?” Durev said uncertainly. Delfina watched as emotions played across his face. First brief confusion, then thought. His eyes opened wide when he realized. “Oh.” Then came his final expression. He swallowed, nodded and smiled. His eyes suddenly lacking the energy that they usually carried. “Well don’t nap for too long. I… we may have another broadcast to record.”


        “Okay.” Delfina said.


        “Okay.” Durev sighed. “Goodbye.”


        Delfina ended the transmission. She felt annoyed to have such a precious moment with Dana interrupted. Curious about what Durev meant by a new broadcast. Anxious about seeing Durev again.


        “That was a strange conversation.” Dana said.


        “A bit. Yes.” Delfina replied. She laid back down and wrapped herself around Dana.


        “I meant what I said earlier. We have extra rooms here. I doubt he’ll want to go through the entire housing process before he goes to sleep.” Dana said.


        “I’m sure he can figure it out. He has a lot of influence I’ve begun to find out recently.” Delfina said.


        “Maybe. Almost everyone on Quella is Alpha, so I don’t know how much his ‘influence’ can help.” Dana said.


        “We don’t have to keep discussing this,” Delfina whispered.


        “I just don’t want to be rude to your friend.” Dana said. “You really don’t want him back. Why?”


        “I want this special moment to be just between us two.” Delfina said. “Seeing you was the only thing that kept me going this whole time. Now that we are both here. I just want to spend the rest of my life here.”


        “So you are staying on Quella?” Dana asked.


        “I thought it was obvious?” Delfina replied.


        Noises from outside Dana’s bedroom interrupted her.


        “I think the rest of my housing unit is back from dinner!” Dana said excitedly.


        Delfina didn’t respond, feeling uncomfortable now that the others had come. It felt as if her sanctuary and special moment with Dana were being violated by others.


        Dana shook Delfina’s arm off and started putting on her tunic.


        “You don’t want to stay here a bit longer?” Delfina asked.


        “We’ve been here two hours Delfina!” Dana smiled. “I missed out dinner when I heard you were coming, but I’m curious what happened since then!” She opened the door and called out greetings to the rest of her housing unit. 
Delfina stayed in the bed, bringing up the thermal covers to her neck. She looked around and finally realized that Dana’s bed was actually made up of four separate cots. She got up with the cover and walked over to the only closet in the small room. She opened it and saw clothing for four different sized people.


“Hello.” A masculine voice came from behind her. She turned to see a bearded man looking at her curiously.


“Hello,” Delfina replied sheepishly.


“Are you the friend of Dana’s?” he asked.


“Yes.”


“Ah, well welcome to Delta 32’s family.” he smiled.


“I just came in here to grab a different outfit, I made a mess during dinner.” he shrugged, pointing to a red smear on his tunic.


        Delfina stepped away from the closet, still hanging onto the covers tightly.


        “You don’t have to be shy. We’re all former Alpha here.” he said, completely taking off all his clothing and changing into his new clothes.


        Delfina just nervously smiled. Uncomfortable with her being so exposed to someone she had never spoken with before. But she did enjoy seeing him remove his clothes a bit. Not enough to offset her nervousness though.


        The second he left she scrambled to get her jumpsuit on, desperate to avoid feeling exposed. She took a deep breath and stepped out into the now crowded center room of the housing unit.
        She heard laughter, smiles and stories. People filtered in and out of the front door which was now left entirely open. She spied Dana across the room, sitting in the lap of one of the other residents. She held the hand of another, as they looked adoringly into each other.
        Delfina could feel her face becoming hot. Jealousy. She recognized the emotion from Phoenix Station, whenever someone else got a promotion over her. But compared to this, those emotions were subdued and sedated. She tried to reason with herself. There was no logical reason for her to immediately get so flustered. But then again there was. Dana was with the others, completely oblivious to her. Delfina felt completely and utterly unwanted. How quickly her good day turned sour. If her heart wasn’t in pain she might have found it interesting.


“Can I have something to drink?” Delfina asked a stranger next to her.


“Of course. Let me get you some water.” She smiled


A moment later she handed a container of water over. Delfina eagerly opened it and drank from it, her eyes transfixed on Dana laughing at someone’s idiotic stories. 


“A thank you is nice.” said the woman who had handed her the container.


“My apologies.” Delfina turned to her. “I am most thankful.”


“I don’t recognize you. Are you new? Or are you from the other side” she said.


“I just arrived today.” Delfina said.


“From off planet or the other side?” she asked.


“From off planet…” Delfina replied. She turned back to look at Dana. It needlessly made her more uncomfortable.


“So you haven’t had time to develop your social skills then?” the woman said to Delfina.


“I suppose not. I’ve been busy.” Delfina replied without turning.


“Well you can relax. We are all very friendly here. Everyone is at unity.” she said.


        “I can see that.” Delfina said.


        “You’re jealous aren’t you? Maybe this isn’t the right place for you.” the woman said.


        Delfina turned to the woman, her jealousy over Dana quickly converted into irritation. “Then what is the right place for me? Hmmm?” she said.


        “The other side of Quella. Where all the antisocials stay.” the woman replied without hesitation, sensing the challenge in Delfina’s words.


        “Why don’t you go there instead? You’ve been most rude to me.” Delfina smiled, her eyes glaring at the woman.


        “So poorly adjusted…” the woman said trailing away.
        Delfina turned back to Dana, who was beginning to trail off with the man she had been flirting with. She felt as if her heart plunged. Everything special she had with Dana was suddenly rendered worthless. She couldn’t watch this happen. Before they could make it back to Dana’s room Delfina intercepted them.


        “Hey Dana, could I talk to you for a second?” she said, scarcely keeping her voice steady.


        “Can it wait? I’m about to have sex.” Dana replied, slightly annoyed.


        Delfina pointed her head to the ceiling, desperately hoping her tears would drain back into her eyes. She looked back at Dana, her eyes watery.


        “Do you have sex… with everyone?” she asked.


        “Not everyone. Just those I want to. Everyone here does. Now that we are done with the Alpha Empire we can enjoy the joys of life!” Dana said.


        “So, we didn’t have anything special?” Delfina asked.


        “Our bond is so long running. Of course it was special. But being with someone that really knows what they are doing is incredible. You should try it out with someone else here!” Dana smiled.


        She disappeared into her bedroom with the man. Delfina leaned against the wall, hearing them start to get intimate. She slid down and put her head in her arms. All she had endured. It was for nothing.


        “Are you okay?” someone asked her.


        She looked up and saw everyone staring at her. 


        “I’m great.” she said. Delfina got up and walked out of the residential unit and into the dark streets of the colony. She looked above her into the giant translucent dome that encased them. She wished for nothing more than for it to track and suck her out into the cold vacuum of space.


        She listed through the streets in complete disbelief of what had happened. She began to retrace what had happened, focusing on what went wrong. She arrived with Durev. Dana was there looking beautiful. Durev left. They talked about what had happened the last time they saw each other. Dana forgave her. They had sex. They lay alongside each other.
        Then everyone else from her unit came. That’s when everything fell apart. Dana’s family who apparently were focused entirely on each other’s carnal desires. Is that all they did? How many times did Dana already have sex with them? Why did Dana even bother meeting up with her? Did she care at all? One fucking bit?
        Delfina suddenly felt herself filled with rage and watched herself smash her hand into a nearby wall. Her fist slammed and she felt a crack. Pain flooded her senses. 


        “Fuck!” she screamed.


        She nurtured her arm close to her. She found herself scared. Scared at the emotions that were raging within her and out of control. And scared that Dana was never going to look at her specially again. How could Dana, the most special person in her life, do this to her? It was so brutally unfair.
She leaned against the wall and let loose the tide of tears she was holding back. Like a broken dam, she released control and wept. It was times like these she desperately wished herself to return to Phoenix Station and embrace the apathetic Alpha Empire.
What did she have left to live for? What was the point of existing? She had no direction left. No goals. All she had wanted to do was return to find Dana. And Dana was consumed by a lust for others.
So what, sensual deprivation at the hands of the Alpha Empire meant that they were to return to their animalistic nature? Back to the instinctual core of the human, filled with reckless abandon and drowning in decadence. She had heard of some people in the ISI returning to their pure forms, much like Dana was doing now. Disgusting, primitive and pitiful. An utter waste.
She couldn’t believe she let herself lose all inhibition with Dana. Her guard was down and Dana’s hold on her heart strengthened. She felt as if she couldn’t breath now. Dana was her everything.
Maybe Dana was just in a temporary state now. Maybe they would make way together off this planet and somewhere else. Just the two of them. But what would they do? It didn’t matter, they would figure it out. As long as they were together she would be happy and she would make Dana happy in any way she could.
But no, there was no way. How could she just ignore her like that. How could she be so physically intimate with so many! It pained her to even think about it. Her precious Dana sharing what Delfina thought was sacred between them with everyone else in her unit.
        
        Delfina recoiled suddenly. She looked at her hand, bleeding at the knuckle, the pain numbing. She was letting it happen again. She was letting herself be consumed by instinctive impulses. How could she not even control her thoughts? Her feelings! Her obsession with dana was killing her. She still had trouble breathing and it scared her. She was going to die. Her emotions would kill her she was sure. She couldn’t take it anymore. She had to go back to Dana.
        No. Dana didn’t deserve her. She was terrible for ruthlessly betraying her trust. How could she! Decades they spent together, she said so herself.


        “Delfina!” came a familiar voice.


        Lost in her thoughts, she didn’t even register someone came. She looked up with teary eyes, hoping beyond hope that Dana had come to her full of regret.


        “Are you okay Delfina! What happened?” Durev asked.


        Delfina looked at him, so completely disappointed that she started to tear up again.


        “Let’s get you off these streets. Come on.” Durev said, noticing Delfina’s bloody hand. He reached for her good hand and pulled her to her feet.


        “Whatever happened. You are going to be okay.” he said, his hands on her shoulders. He looked directly into her eyes. Delfina refusing to look back at his. But finally she gave in and did. Choosing to put her trust in him where all others had failed her.


***


        “What happened?” Durev asked.


        They sat in the tiny temporary housing reserved for new arrivals. Delfina looked around, breathing deeply. She licked the salty remnants of tears off her lips. Her throat was a desert. Her mind a desolate valley. Her heart a wasteland.
All around her were paintings. Completely unrealistic. They were composed of vivid colors, resembling people in motion. At first she thought of them as ugly as the city of Ganti. A myriad of colors assembled at random. But she realized this was not the case. Each of the paintings somehow elicited feelings. One of them was a person running, almost as if they were beginning to fly. Another one had —.


“Delfina. Are you with me?” Durev asked again, worried.


“I was betrayed.” Delfina said angrily.


“By that woman. Dana?”


Delfina nodded her head. Her face once again took on a red tone. “Might as well have jettisoned me into space or pushed me into a volcano.”


“But what did she do?” Durev asked.


“I loved her. I… I still do.” Delfina said, ignoring Durev. “Damn her for making me feel like this.”


        “Did she hurt you?” Durev asked.


        “Not physically. Although it certainly feels like it!” Delfina said.


        “Than what did she do?” Durev asked.


        “You should ask who she didn’t do.” Delfina said, turning to him, her face a pained mockery of her usual cheery self.


        “I’m sorry that happened. I guess you didn’t know how things worked on Quella.” Durev said.


        “I guess so!” Delfina said, throwing her hands into the air. “Why didn’t you tell me about any of this? You knew everyone here was… out of control!”


        “I… didn’t think you would want to know.” Durev stammered.


        “I’m terrible with people. I have no illusions about that. But that Durev, that was a lie!” Delfina said. “Why didn’t you tell me.”


        “I wanted you to see it for yourself. I could tell you are someone who prefers monogamy and stability and unless you saw for yourself that—”

        “That everyone here was just having sex? That their purpose in life is just to explore each other now?” Delfina interrupted.


        “Yes. Many former Alpha Citizens are overtaken by lust because they have never experienced it.” Durev said.


        “Oh yes! Wonderful. Well tell me this Durev. Why am I not ‘overtaken by lust’. Why is it that thinking about Dana being intimate makes me want to die.” Delfina yelled.


        “Because that’s just how you are!” Durev said. “What do you want me to tell you? Humans are the way they are. Some like to lead, some like to follow. Some like to have sex with one person at a time. Some like to have sex with ten people at a time.”


        Delfina squeezed her eyes shut, trying to get images of Dana with so many others out of her mind.


        “I’m sorry Delfina. It is how it is. But I think that I have something that can help.” Durev said.


        “Unless Dana is hiding in your damn pocket I don’t think you have anything that can help.” Delfina said.


        Durev pulled out a pill, holding it up to Delfina between his thumb and index finger.


        “What the hell is that. Is it poison?” Delfina said.


        “Not quite. It’s what ISI soldiers use after difficult combat. It will make your mind clear and your emotions objective. I think you can use it right now.” Durev said.


        Delfina snatched it out of his hand and tossed it in her mouth. It dissolved instantly. It didn’t matter to her if it was filled with cyanide. She wanted anything except for the visceral emotions tearing into her very being she was experiencing right now.


        Sixty seconds passed of absolutely nothing. And then... 


it felt like she went into phase consciously once more.


***


Chapter 22: Acceptance


But instead of as a person, she was the ship… the vessel. She closed her eyes and felt herself flying across the galaxy through multiple dimensions at a time. Asteroids flew towards her but she smashed through them. They crumbled into brilliant pockets of light that she proceeded to inhale. She found herself increasing in speed, light couldn’t even keep up with her but she could still see. She was heading towards the center of the galaxy, straight into the monstrous black hole that tethered the galaxy.
        She watched the black hole consume a star, violently tearing it apart. Loudly. She continued to accelerate directly into the black hole, but no matter how much she squirmed she was on course directly into the center of the black hole. And the closer she got, the more massive she realized it was. The amount of light it blocked began to engulf her vision. She was mere moments away from the event horizon. This was her last chance to break free, before she disintegrated. And she wasn't ready to die. Not yet. But it was pointless. Inevitability took its toll on her and she surrendered herself, passing directly into the event horizon.
        Light entirely ceased and she was now truly in phase. Her senses cut off. Her mind blank. Nothingness engulfed her. She imagined titanic forces were crushing her now. Maybe her soul was off to a different dimension. Because there was nothing left of here.


        Then light. She screamed as loud as she could yet no sound came out. All around her total white. There was no escaping it. She couldn’t close her eyes because she had none. The light burned her. She would tear up if she could. But it became bearable. She adapted to it and soaked it in. Total light from all directions.
        She was no longer a person. She just saw things for what they were. There was no more Delfina. She ceased to exist and melded with the universe… a casual observer of an infinite plane.
She saw the planets of the universe… filled with life yet racked by war. And yet all around these colonized planets were hundreds more floating idly. They were entirely ignored by people. Ripe for exploration and colonization but forgotten. Instead, she saw the colonized planet’s fade one by one. Consumed by fire. Left as spheres of death. Barren, solemn memorials of the divisiveness of mankind.
She saw two planets at opposite ends of the universe. Both broadcasting lies to the people around them. Veiling the true nature of the universe. Both needed to be annihilated for stability to resume. For people to flourish once more in this brutal universe.
For space was filled with destructive forces. Stars exploded into supernovae, annihilating entire star systems. Gamma ray bursts sterilized vast sections of the galaxy. Gigantic space entities crashed into each other with titanic force. She could feel the raw destructive power of nature all around the warring space colonies. Humans were nothing compared to such incomprehensible forces. She watches space colonies disappear to tragic natural events. Swallowed by stars, consumed by comments. Ships phasing throughout the universe that were lost in the silky alternate fabric of space itself.
But there was so much beauty in the universe too. Brilliant nebulas that spawned new stars. Planets born from the ashes of former stars. And people. Humans who got to experience it all through a tumultuous, tragic experience that was simultaneously filled with joy and irrepressible hope.


        What Delfina felt was inconsequential. She had to silence the Alpha Empire and end the ISI’s total censure. The people of the Alpha colonies would be free to embrace true life and the people of the ISI would finally be able to travel outside of their bounds and settle new worlds and spread life to uncharted worlds. And both the people of the ISI and the Alpha Empire would know peace.


        That was Delfina’s mission. It was her goal. It was her purpose in life. When that was fulfilled she would have a new purpose. Or she wouldn’t. It mattered not.


***


        Dim light. Gray walls. Vivid paintings. Delfina woke in the temporary housing of Quella. She clenched onto the sides of her chair, unsure if the vision was over. It felt like it was over. Behind her came light breathing, Durev was passed out on a small cot himself.


        “Durev.” Delfina said in a stern voice.


        “What… Delfina!” Durev said, awaking with a jolt. “You’re awake. Are you feeling okay.”


        “Reborn.” Delfina replied.


        “Wow. Okay. I’ve never seen someone react to Clarity so strongly. I was about to call medical assistance.” Durev said.


        “Don’t fear. Medical is unnecessary now. But we have a lot of work to do.” Delfina said, standing up.


        “Work? Are you sure you are feeling okay? You seemed devastated yesterday. You’re not keeping these feelings bottle up Delfina?” Durev asked concerned.


        “I feel how I feel. But we have things to do much greater than ourselves. I need you to contact all heads of the ISI, except for Vincere of course. But start with the Queen of Oslia. From what documents I could get my hands on it seems the heads have been decisive on plenty of decisions. I think I can convince some of them to see things my way.” Delfina said smugly.


        “Are you insane? There is a warrant out for your arrest right now. If not for the fake identity you came here under you would be facing an Initiative court right now.” Durev said in disbelief.


        “You know as well as I do that I am a token of power. The other heads will want to talk to me to flaunt that power.” Delfina said.


        “How are you sure about this? What documents are you talking about.” Durev asked, completely taken aback by her sudden drive.


        “I spent decades cracking ISI communications.” Delfina said. Durev still looked completely unconvinced. “Suffice to say…” Delfina continued, “I spoofed the datapad you gave me and ran into some very colorful, conflicting messages exchanged by them. Oh! And in addition to sending the message, I’m going to need a fresh set of clothes. That Clarity pill made me sweat like never before.”


        “Uh… yeah okay.” Durev said, getting up and searching around.


        “I’m drafting the actual message now. Get me an audience and I promise you’ll have one great story to share.” Delfina said.


***


 “Queen of Oslia, this is the high profile Alpha Researcher Delfina. I believe we have mutually beneficial topics to discuss. I will meet with you in forty hours from the current time. Be ready to receive me. If you have any of the same distrust I share for Vincere, you’ll benefit greatly.” Delfina said.


“Alright that’s the whole message. Send it using your special encrypted channel.” Delfina said.


“I don’t think this is a good idea. You addressed one of the head’s of the ISI. She alone commands entire battle fleets. And you spoke to her like an equal. I doubt she will react positively to that. People in high up positions need to be implored and treated with massive amounts of respect. She’ll probably shoot us out of orbit the moment we arrive.” Durev said.


“If she does so be it. Clearly my plan wouldn’t have worked regardless.” Delfina said nonchalantly.


Durev’s eyes widened at the implication of what she said. “You don’t mind dying just like that? Your whole new mission incomplete. No grand difference made!”


“Of course I want to make a difference. But this is the only way. If we can’t get through to the Queen of Oslia than nothing will work. So let us get shot down. At least I won’t have to worry about following through.”


        “I think Clarity made you insane.” Durev muttered.


        “Let us hope so. Do you have transport arranged to Oslia yet?” Delfina asked.


        “Still working on it. I’m a civilian reporter not a military commander. How many ships do you think I have at my disposal?” Durev said frustrated.


        “Should I find someone that does?” Delfina asked.


        “No. I can handle it!” Durev said.


        “Good. While you take care of that, I have one last thing to take care of.” Delfina said, her voice betraying the slightest of worries.


***


        The woman Delfina shared an unpleasant conversation with opened the door to Delta 32’s Housing Unit.


        “You again.” she said.


        “Me again. Is Dana here. I have something important to tell her.” Delfina said politely.


        “I don’t trust you to talk to her. Your dangerous.” she said.
        “I’m harmless I can assure you. You can stand right here while we talk. It won’t take long.” Delfina said.


        A moment later Dana came out, worry in her eyes. “Delfina where did you go? Why did you leave!”


        “I had to deal with some emotions.” Delfina stated. “I’m leaving Quella in a few hours and wanted to say goodbye to you.”


        “What? You told me you were staying. Was yesterday really that uncomfortable for you?” Dana asked, her face betraying her disappointment. “You get used to it I promise. I got carried away yesterday, but really, it’s wonderful. It’s the way life was meant to be lived Delfina.”


        “Maybe it is Dana. You know I love you. I’ve always loved you for decades without knowing it. But I can’t… come around to your lifestyle. Not now. I wanted you for myself, for our bond to be just between us. Maybe some day we will still have that.”


        “Please, Delfina!” Dana said. “Don’t leave me again.”


        “Just like before I have no choice. But you will always be in my heart Dana. Goodbye.” Delfina said.


        She walked away without turning back. A single tear slid down her cheek. But she brushed it off and took out her datapad. She was about to meet a queen.


        ***


        “Oslia control. This is Gray Typhoon requesting landing permission.” Jessica said.


        “Gray Typhoon, you are not scheduled anywhere. What is your destination.”


        Jessica looked up at Delfina, distrust in her eyes. But she said it anyway.


        “Destination is Queen’s Palace.”


        “Gray Typhoon! That is restricted air space. Prepare to be boarded. If you attempt to escape you will be immobilized or destroyed.”


        “Let me talk to them.” Delfina said.


        “Don’t you think they are frazzled enough?” Jessica said.


        “Just do it.” Delfina said.


        Jessica punched in a command and gestured to Delfina.


        “Oslia control. This is Former Alpha Researcher Delfina. I am here to see the Queen of Oslia. She is expecting me.”


        “Gray Typhoon are you out of your mind?”


        “Delfina, I’m starting to doubt your plan here. Your confidence isn’t convincing me anymore.” Jessica said.


        “Just wait. I read about the Queen of Oslia. I think her and I are much alike.” Delfina said.


        “And if she isn’t.” Jessica asked.


        “Than enjoy your last moments free and alive.” Delfina said.


        “How the hell did you talk me into taking you here.” Jessica replied.


        “Just wait.” Delfina said.


        “Gray Typhoon, you have clearance to land. Follow coordinates explicitly or risk being shot down. Over and out.”


        “I told you.” Delfina said, heading to the back.


        “We got company.” Jessica said.


        Four ISI fighters took up escort position alongside the merchant ship.


        “How nice of them to send us an escort.” Durev said.


        “Just don’t stray Jessica. They aren’t kidding about us getting shot down.” Delfina said.


        ***


        The Queen’s Palace sat on a hill in the center of a grassy plain that stretched to the horizon in every direction. It was a massive structure, constructed on the exterior with pure marble. Even the defensive turrets half hidden all along the sides had marble exteriors. Oslia’s sky was naturally dark, but the blue grasses making up the plane were bioluminescent. This made the palace’s marble exterior gleam brightly to anyone looking upon it.
        From the sides streamed waterfalls into small pools which formed even more waterfalls. Meticulously arranged foliage surrounded these pools, adding a variety of color to the palace.
The palace had dozens of towers, all extruding at acute angles, forming slender curves that pointed towards the sky. It gave the impression of a living organism, almost like a beautiful marble covered plant.


The moment they landed, guards escorted them straight into the palace. Delfina was certain they were extremely suspicious of them. She dared not make any sudden movements, after all, they already made it this far.


“Stop.” The captain of the guard said. “Only you go.” he said, pointing to Delfina.


The guards opened a pair of massive double doors made of pure sapphire. Delfina looked at them in admiration before silently striding forward, alone.


In front of her was a massive staircase, similarly composed of marble like the rest of the palace. Behind her the doors closed.


A single figure began descending the stairs. It was a woman, undoubtedly the Queen of Oslia. She was very tall and thin, but she wore an exquisite dress that flowed unnaturally all around her on the floor. The Queen was absolutely beautiful, but not the same way Delfina viewed Dana. The Queen was a frigid kind of beautiful. Her figure alone looked like she was descended from Royalty and Delfina could make out her piercing blue eyes from across the hall. She seemed like frost incarnate. A cold, dangerous beauty. Immediately Delfina knew she was in the right place.


“You know how to make an entrance.” Delfina said.


“And you are among the rudest people I have ever met.” the Queen said, her words carefully articulated. Her motions calculated. Her stride filled with grace.


Delfina smiled. “From what I know of you, you don’t respond well to those who prostrate themselves before you.”


“How inquisitive of you.” the Queen said, approaching Delfina. “And where did you learn so much about me?”


“There’s a lot of publically available information… it’s not too difficult.” Delfina said. “But I’m more interested in Vincere.”


The Queen closed the distance between herself and Delfina, gazing down at her from mere centimeters away. Delfina was unused to feeling short. She was of above average height, but never took notice when people were taller than her. The Queen however, she made sure Delfina took notice. 


“Isn’t everyone interested in Vincere…” she said.


“Correction Queen, I am interested in what you think of Vincere.” Delfina said.


The Queen took a hand and carefully put it on the side of Delfina’s face. “Careful what you wish for researcher. If I get too talkative… you’ll never be able to leave. There’s a lot of information I don’t want… being mistold.” She took her hand off Delfina’s face.


“Well than. How about this.” Delfina said. “Alpha Prime. We know where it is. He won’t attack it.”


“Of course not.” the Queen said turning around. She gestured with her hand and light background music started playing.


“What would it take to override his wishes?” Delfina asked.


“Governor Vincere commands a sizable amount of respect from everyone. His wishes are not simply… overridden like a program.” the Queen said.


“What would it take.” Delfina asked again.


“The other heads. Theoretically we all hold equal power. If more than half of us decide to invade it will happen. But from what you said about Alpha Prime… we’ll need all the fleets.” the Queen mused.


“So we convince the others to join.” Delfina said.


“You have yet to convince me.” the Queen said sharply.


Delfina looked at the ground, thinking. “This is about power.” she said.


“Isn’t everything?” the Queen said.


“Vincere is terrified of losing it.” Delfina said.


“Who isn’t.” the Queen laughed.


“But that’s what you want.” Delfina said defiantly.


“It might be. So confident of yourself you are.” the Queen said. “Yet there is still so much you don’t know.” She gestured again and the pleasant background music gradually increased in pace.


“You can be as ambiguous as you please your highness. If you want to hear it I’ll tell it to you straight. If Alpha Prime is destroyed you can colonize other worlds freely and openly. You can make your dominion as large as you want and no one will have an excuse to stop you. Your political enemies will look weak next to your massive achievements and the power of the ISI will be permanently shifted in your favor.” Delfina said.


“You are quite the treat Delfina. Coming in here and meeting all my expectations. Well except for politeness, you never were good at social graces.” the Queen said. “Perhaps why your lover cannot stand to be with you no matter how much history you have.”


Delfina’s eyes widened and her nostrils flared.


“Am I wrong?” the Queen asked with mock politeness.


        Delfina knew she was being tested. It was expected of the queen. It was in her nature to test anyone she put her trust in. Just like Delfina.


        “You are entirely correct.” Delfina said sternly. “I’ve had issues adapting ever since becoming part of the ISI and it’s why my lover, Dana, cannot stand to be with me.”


        “Admirable that you can control yourself so well. Few people see right through my tests.” the Queen said.


        “Names. Who should I talk to next and convince.” Delfina asked.


        “Start with the Duke of Chora. He’ll be… more open than the rest to what you suggest. But no guarantees he will let you leave. You do still have a warrant for inciting distrust within the ISI people after all.”


        “I came here expecting to be blasted out of the sky.” Delfina replied.


        “The day is young.” the Queen said. “I’ll give you a ship. Use it wisely. If you fail to convince anyone to attack Alpha Prime than I too… will revert to being unconvinced.” the Queen said, turning around. “Now leave my sight. You’ve entertained me enough for one day.”


***


        Delfina straightened her gown, relishing the soft feeling of silk against her skin. Durev had stressed that she needed to be more presentable and less alien. She had no objections. Especially now when she felt unusually beautiful. Having the gown fit her so closely attracted many looks in Chora’s parliament building. She pretended as if she didn’t see them when in reality every single glance made her feel more powerful. She was really starting to enjoy her role as a high profile negotiator.


        “The Duke of Chora will meet with you momentarily Lady Delfina.” the Duke’s personal attendant said.


        Delfina politely smiled and waited. She had wasted no time traveling straight to Chora. If the Queen of Oslia said she had a chance convincing the Duke of Chora, then so be it. She hesitated to put so much trust in the Queen of Oslia, who clearly schemed consistently since she took control of Oslia. Yet she had no choice and simply hoped the the Queen of Oslia’s goals would align with her own.


        “The Duke will see you now Lady Delfina.” the attendant said.


        Delfina entered the Duke’s council chambers. From what she could understand, it was modeled after an ancient library. Books were stacked in shelves perhaps a dozen floors high. In the corner roared a fire within the stone fireplace. Exotic animal furs lined the floor and walls. Behind a large wooden desk sat the Duke of Chora. He was heavyset, but still remarkably fit. At least that’s what Delfina assumed from the Duke’s stature and stiff posture.
        
        “Welcome Delfina.” the Duke said, waving her in and standing. He took two glasses and filled them with some sort of purple beverage. Delfina hesitated when he handed her one but decided to take it. There were far easier ways for her to get assassinated then poison.


        “Greetings Duke Folcher, I thank you for meeting with me.” Delfina said. She took a sip of what turned out to be wine.


        “Queen Szwedko seemed to think you were worth listening too, and I didn’t survive to rule Chora for nearly three hundred years by keeping my ears closed and my mind shut.” the Duke said.


        “Then it surprises me that you have not publicly announced your intent to destroy Alpha Prime.” Delfina said.


        “There are many variables that factor into such a momentous decision. Many of which I’m sure you never considered.” Duke Folcher said.


        “Here is a variable. Do you want this war to end?” Delfina asked.


        “What psychopathic monster doesn’t?” the Duke answered.


        “The kind who consistently refuses to invade Alpha Prime and end this war.” Delfina said sternly.


        “And risk sending our entire fleet in one place? Leaving our systems defenseless against any potential attacks? Very ill advised.” the Duke responded.


        Delfina paused. The Duke was right. There were some facets of the invasion she hadn’t thought about. But she would be damned if it would stop her. “Perhaps a strategy exists where an invasion can be launched and our worlds still secure?”


        “Our worlds? I still haven’t completely come around to you being a part of the ISI researcher.” the Duke said.


        “I’ve read up on you, you aren’t the kind to engage in these sorts of games. What are you after?” Delfina asked.


        “Clearly you haven’t read enough about me because truth is I love engaging in tomfoolery. Especially when I know the person across from me does as well. My memory is long enough to recall your rather recent message to the citizens of the ISI. Wasn’t too hard to crack.” Duke Folcher said.


        “Hard enough that the censors missed it.” Delfina challenged.


        “The very same censors which are there for an important reason. We are at war. We cannot afford mistrust with our citizens. Now more than ever.” Duke Folcher responded. “Fostering mistrust and disdain for us is the exact same agenda that Alpha agents have.”


        “So you operate under the assumption I am an active Alpha agent?” Delfina asked, taken aback. “I thought you smarter than this.”


        “I could care less what you think of me. What matters is what I think of you. Because so far you haven’t earned a modicum of trust from me. And I won’t be tricked into putting the lives of Chora’s armed forces and it’s citizens in peril needlessly.”


        Delfina tried to control her frustration. She had rehearsed how this conversation might go a hundred times on the journey to Chora. Not once did she anticipate her allegiance to be questioned. She might have been prepared if he were to question her validity as a source or strategist, but not her allegiance. She tried not to show it but failed to keep herself from subconsciously glaring at Duke Folcher.


        “Struck a nerve have I? For all you have tried, you were never good at social graces.” the Duke said, gazing at the fire and sipping his wine glass.


        Delfina looked at the fire as well, and felt an uncomfortable warmth spread through her body. She felt sweat begin to gather on her back and neck. “Funny you should mention that,” Delfina said with feigned calm. “The Queen of Oslia told me the same exact thing. And I’ll tell you what I told her... it’s true. I was born on Belusia while it was under the control of the Alpha Empire and stayed there for nearly four decades before it was freed by the ISI. At the time I thought the ISI were my enemy. The scourge of the world and destroyers of the Alpha Empire, which in my eyes, was the salvation of humanity. That happens when you grow up on a world where communication is strictly controlled and you are told what to think.”


        “And you believe our censorship to be the same?” Duke Folcher responded.


        “Very much the same. You decide who hears what depending on how well it suits your purpose. It leads to an entire system filled with people incapable of thought, drowning in their fear of the unknown. Your censorship breeds terrible xenophobia Duke.” Delfina said.


        “You say this almost as if you hadn’t starred in an interview intended to humanize people of the Alpha Empire. Your contradictions are entertaining, but also insulting.” the Duke said, finishing his glass.


        “Humanize them in order to sedate people into thinking that the Alpha Empire isn’t a threat. I don’t know what kind of system you have going on here that you think is worth risking a massive resurgence by the Alpha Empire. You speak of your citizens lives being put in danger should we invade Alpha Prime, yet you completely discount their standing forces at the moment. They will attack. The only way to prevent that is to strike first and eliminate them and finally end this destructive conflict. Have you seen what the battles look like first hand? The soldiers screaming and the civilians, their bodies covering street after street? Why would you condone this brutal planet by planet strategy when it’s no secret the Alpha Empire is using them as buffer worlds to buy time. Most of the information I brought with me has already been verified regardless. Don’t trust in me, trust in the data that says the Alpha Empire has a thousand warships ready to strike wherever necessary.”


        “An interesting argument you put forth Delfina.” Duke Folcher said.


        “Interesting!” Delfina yelled. “We’ll see how interesting it is when one of your core worlds has been smashed into pieces. How interesting would it be if Chora was annihilated overnight. Would you invade then!”


        “Do not suggest the destruction of my world. Even in jest. I do not take to that lightly.” the Duke warned.


“Good!” Delfina said. “You shouldn’t take it lightly because all the other heads damn well seem to. I thought you were the most reasonable of all of them. But it seems you are just as rooted in some invisible political mess as the rest of them. The safety of your people cannot possibly be the reason you refuse to support an invasion of Alpha Prime.”


“The safety of my people is paramount. But unbeknownst to you, the safety of my people is threatened from so many angles at once that I cannot focus all my attention on one.” Duke Folcher said, perhaps a bit more aggressively than his previous responses.


“What is it? A renegade asteroid? Pirates? What do you fear so much Duke Folcher?” Delfina pleaded.


The Duke cleared his throat. “Do you know how the war between the Alpha Empire got started?” he asked, his voice suddenly stone cold.


        Delfina said nothing.


        “Because if you did, you would know exactly what I fear. As long as you don’t understand the dangers to the very core of the ISI, I do not think you will be in any position to negotiate.” the Duke said. “This exchange is done.”


***


        Sacha Durev waited for Delfina outside the Parliament in the bright Chorish sun.


        “How did it go? Is he on board?” he asked.


        “No. Far from it. I have some research to do.” Delfina said stiffly.


        “Damn. What do you need to know. I’m a reporter if you forgot.” Durev said.


        Delfina looked around the busy Choran street. “Not here.” she said. “Is there a data terminal aboard the ship the Oslian Queen gave us?”


        “Of course.”


***


        “So what is this big question you need to know the answer to.” Durev finally asked.


        Delfina situated herself aboard the corvette class ship, comfortably nestled where the communications officer would normally be situated. The crew of the ship was outside eating, planning on what to do while they were in Chora.


        “Durev, do you know how the war with the Alpha Empire started?” Delfina asked.


        “Well of course, let’s see…” Durev said, scratching his head. “The Alpha Empire attacked the ISI and that’s how it began... of course.”


        “And the Planet Xenon, does that mean anything to you?” Delfina asked.


        “It was the planet that was attacked. It was brutally ravaged by an Alpha battlefleet and led to the escalation of the war.” Durev said.


        “And how did you learn this?” Delfina asked.


        “It’s just common knowledge really. I mean they have tours to Xenon all the time and we have a memorial for them once a Xenon year.” Durev replied. “Why do you ask? Was that the burning question?”


        Delfina raised a finger for Durev to wait while using the communication’s console to comb through three separate logs at the same time.


        “Yeah, I’ll wait.” Durev said annoyed. He crossed his arms and watched delfina absorb information at an exorbitantly fast rate.


        “All the official ISI records support your theory. Seventy-two years ago Xenon was attacked by the Alpha Empire and subsequently destroyed. Just like Count Lapsus told me.” Delfina said, remembering suddenly his brief history lesson.


        “Count who?” Durev asked.


        “Don’t worry about it.” Delfina quickly said. Durev wondered how he could stand Delfina shutting him out of her thought process. “As part of the ship, the wonderful Dragoslava, Queen of Oslia, gave us access to some extremely high level event logs. No matter how much I tried to hack the ISI communications and data network, I would have never imagined gaining access. It seems to be limited to just a few physical places in the ISI. It’s an enormously important gift that I’m surprised she didn’t stress more.” Delfina said.


“And why is it so important?” Durev asked.


“One second.” Delfina said, running the same search about Xenon on the classified data. She stopped when she saw what she was looking for. The events concerning Xenon during the onset of the ISI-Alpha War. Or from what she was reading now, the ISI Civil War. “Oh shit… Durev you have to see this.”


***


Delfina cross checked the classified data with data stored in the official ISI network concerning the ISI-Alpha Empire War. But no matter how much she tried to disprove what she learned, it fit in perfectly. The timeline made sense, everyone’s actions. The classified information even fit in perfectly with what Count Lapsus told her. Except for the one important detail he left out on.
        How could she have been so blindly trusting? How could Durev who lived his entire life in the ISI and strove to circumvent their censorship? The entire populace of the ISI must have been unaware of how the Alpha War started! Now Vincere’s need to utterly censor everything made sense, anything less and he risked the total fragmentation of the ISI. She had to catalog it, from the beginning. From the very formation of the ISI.


***
        
        Count Lapsus of Elysium was right about many things. Contrary to ISI common knowledge, Gleron and the other Core Worlds were not where humanity started. They were the results of decade long terraforming projects when colonists arrived from outside the sector. Whether these colonists came from Earth or not is unknown, but life was not endemic to any planet currently under the ISI or Alpha Empire.
        The ISI came to power as an agreement between the Core Worlds. That occurred roughly one hundred and fifty years ago. 


All the planet’s that signed the ISI Accord still existed except Xenon. 


All who signed the ISI Accord still lived save Emperor Nikondrius of Noesteea.


Sixty years after the signing of the Inter Systems Initiative Accord, a dynamic rift between the different member states became obvious. Oslia, Chora, Zefrora and Typhon were beginning to lag behind Bryke, Noesteea, Gleron and Xenon. This led to an entire decade of escalating tension, with the weaker members attempting pass limiting restrictions on how fast the other worlds could expand.
Theoretically, all new worlds were colonized or claimed jointly by the ISI, but it soon turned out that Xenon was directly responsible for the settlement of more than half of new colonies. These new colonies pledged their allegiance to the Count of Xenon rather than the ISI, despite his protests, as feeble as they were. The records indicated that every single Head of the ISI was as power hungry as the next with the exception of the Shogun of Bryke who truly did not wish to expand his own power and focused instead on the harmony between the different Core Worlds of the ISI.
During this moment of history, colonization efforts were joint, but each world still fielded its own independent starfleets and armies. This did nothing to ease the tension between the worlds as Xenon, Gleron, and Noesteea became distrustful of the other Core Worlds and saw increasingly little tying them together within the ISI. Gleron was the first world settled, and therefore bore the title as the most advanced world within the known universe. Noesteea was quickly gaining prominence as well, despite being settled last it was a close second to Gleron.
        Xenon on the other hand wasn’t as advanced as either Noesteea or Gleron, but it did have a massive string of colonies solely pledging allegiance to it. And the combined industry of these systems far surpassed those of any ISI Core World.
The Shogun of Bryke, despite controlling a world in the same league as Noesteea, Gleron and Xenon, was increasingly siding with the less advanced Core Worlds. The Shogun wanted to preserve the increasingly fragile alliance between the worlds. Even if it meant limiting the expansion of his own world.


The tipping point came when a massive joint fleet composed of Oslian, Choran, Zefroran and Typhonian ships phased to Xenon and demanded the Count of Xenon relinquish command over the massive network of colonies he had acquired. But the Count, especially under the urging of his wife, the Countess of Xenon, was convinced over the years that the system of colonies they were instantiating was a better one than the ISI. He seeked out nothing except to create the perfect world for people to live in. And they succeeded through massive amounts of automation and the grafting of a massive network of Artificial Intelligences networked across the colonies, based at a secret location that the Core Worlds had no idea about.
When the joint ISI fleet arrived over Xenon, the Count refused to surrender control of the colonies and after a last ditch series of diplomatic negotiations, the ISI fleet opened fire on Xenon and it’s own defensive fleet. Within hours, a hidden fleet constructed by the various Xenonian colonies arrived to reinforce Xenon, turning the engagement into a bitter, year long siege.
Emperor Nikondrius of Noesteea, had vowed to protect Xenon in case of an event like this, and committed his forces to reinforcing Xenon, turning the tide against the joint ISI fleet. The Shogun of Bryke, heartbroken by the fragmentation of the ISI, saw no choice but to side with the original Core Worlds against Xenon which threatened the stability of the entire sector. He reluctantly committed his forces and bolstered the outmatched ISI joint fleet.
Only the Governor of Gleron, Vincere, had yet to join battle. Like Emperor Nikondrius of Noesteea, he had sworn to side with Xenon in case it was attacked. Instead however, he had his forces launch a full invasion of Noesteea, his closest ally in a gut wrenching betrayal. Taking out the two strongest Core Worlds in one blow.
Noesteea was decimated. All of it’s available warships were recalled to fend off the Gleronian fleet. But the battle tested fleets of Noesteea were worn out from the pronlonged siege and severely understrength. They were summarily completely destroyed. Noesteea was conquered and Emperor Nikondrius brutally executed. In order to prevent riots on Noesteea, Governor Vincere put Emperor Nikondrius’s infant son on the throne: the future Baron Frasier.
Xenon could no longer hold out by itself. The Count of Xenon, none other than Count Lapsus, orchestrated a large scale evacuation of the planet to colonies of Xenon. He ordered the colony fleets to pull back and consolidate their strength, dooming his world and the billions of souls that could not be evacuated in time. Count Lapsus elected to stay with his doomed world, convinced of the need to carry the penalty for failing his people. He was however, forcibly removed by his own staff at the urging of his wife and made it offworld before the planet was nuked from orbit, utterly annihilating all cities and everyone save a few unfortunate souls who would try to scavenge a living from the blasted hellscape that remained of Xenon.


Count Lapsus in his grief, saw himself unfit to lead and resigned his command to his wife. Abdicating the throne, he left for a desolate volcanic colony with his closest supporters. The Countess of Xenon declared the colonies a separate entity from the ISI and named them the Alpha Empire, in reference to their technological and ethical superiority over the ISI who were too torn over personal power struggles and grievances to progress humanity.


And that is how the Alpha Empire began. The ashes of the people of Xenon, united under the Countess who became the first person to “transcend” and join the AI network of the colonies.


Since then, the ISI has been reclaiming world after world, believing in the mythical Alpha Prime less and less after every year until Delfina managed to return bearing proof of its existence… 
        
        Except now Alpha Prime was no longer an out of the way AI hub. The Alpha Empire were turning the entire thing into a massive beacon of artificial intelligence to complete humanity’s transcendence into the new age, leaving humanity behind.


***


        “I don’t believe it.” Durev said. “I mean I do… but, it’s so damn hard to digest. This entire war exists because eight people couldn’t get along. How many billions died because of that? Damn human stupidity.”


        “Careful with that line of thought. That’s the Alpha mindset.” Delfina warned.


        “How the tables have turned. If not for the massive casualties Alpha bombardments caused early in the war I might have sided with them for a moment. They were attacked. They were left no choice. What are you going to do with all this information?” Durev asked her.


        “Finish what I came here to do. This war will end one way or another.” she replied.


***


        “Back so soon?” Duke Folcher said, slightly amused.


        “I learn quickly.” Delfina said.


        “Oh do you now?” the Duke said, only half interested.


        “I picked it up during my forty years with the Alpha Empire.” Delfina said. “Or would you prefer me to say ‘my time with Xenon’s former colonies.’”
        The Duke spat out his wine. “What did you just say?”


        “Xenon’s former colonies. Tell me, where you there when Governor Vincere betrayed Emperor Nikondrius and nearly razed his planet? Or during the annihilation of Xenon?” Delfina said.


        “How? No… it matters not you’ve made your point. Yes I was there. I was with my fleet when we glassed Xenon’s surface off the face of the universe.” Duke Folcher said.


        “Glad to hear you admit it. Now tell me. Is this what you are afraid of? Another Alpha Empire fragmenting from the ISI the second the current one is destroyed?” Delfina asked, her arms crossed.


        “Yes.” the Duke responded.


        “So this ‘Beta Imperium’, you really think it will split away from the ISI? From Oslia potentially? Queen Szwedko certainly seems to disagree with some of the other heads of the ISI. Or is it Governor Vincere who changed his mind and wants to back out again? Tell me!”


        “You are not in any position to make demands!” the Duke yelled.


        “You’re right. I’m not. But neither are you.” Delfina said, unfazed.


        “Excuse me you Alpha traitor?” the Duke said.


        “Demands of your people that is. I know what you fear. And it isn’t anything like the Alpha Empire. You're afraid of losing control, just like all those years ago. And it’s not just you. It’s the rest of the heads too. You can’t stand to think that the ISI doesn’t need rulers anymore. Especially tyrants like you.” Delfina accused.


        “I am no tyrant and have always served everyone I am responsible for. To say otherwise is to ignore every decision I have ever made for Chora!” the Duke said. “If you came here to insult me I will return you right back to Vincere where you can rot in prison.”


        “I actually didn’t come here specifically to insult you.” Delfina said. “I came here to tell you, one last time, to support an invasion of Alpha Prime. How many more worlds have to burn before you are convinced? End this war Duke. Do it for your people and stop sending them to war. The galaxy is too brutal a place to needlessly wage war.”


        “Vincere will never support this.” he said.


        “I don’t need him to support it. He has betrayed enough people for his schemes long enough. And it looks like he nearly convinced you to become the same sort of leader. But not quite yet. Can I count on your support?” Delfina asked.


        “Can you convince the others?” the Duke said.


        “Will a majority suffice?” Delfina asked.


        “Yes. And Bryke. Without the Shogun of Bryke we won’t be able to orchestrate the invasion. He is personally familiar with every single fleet commander and will be instrumental in launching the invasion.”


        “Than he will come to my way of thinking…” Delfina said.


***


        “I just had a conversation with the Duchess of Zefrora.” Durev said. “She will support you if you get enough others to join.”


        “I knew if either Chora or Zefrora came around the other would. Saves us a trip. Let’s go to Noesteea.” Delfina said.


        “Noesteea? You said the Duke of Chora made it adamant that the Shogun of Bryke be involved. Why waste your time with Noesteea?” Durev questioned.


        “Because I have a card to play that I am certain will bring Baron Frasier to support us.” Delfina said.


        “And what use is his support? Noesteea is weak and insignificant.” Durev stated.


        “Try to control your bias Durev, it wasn’t always this way.” Delfina said. “And it won’t be weak and insignificant forever.”


***


        “I’m surprised you had the gall to return.” Baron Frasier said.


        His freakish appearance hadn’t changed much. His teeth were now composed of emeralds and he wore a cloak which pulsated in opacity whenever he spoke, revealing the delicately tailored suit he wore underneath.


        “Fear not. Lieutenant Siskind is not with us.” Delfina said.


        “I still have to punch that bastard’s face back. But I won’t leave it at that.” Baron Frasier said.


        “I believe you should leave it at that.” Delfina said.


        “And why would I do that Alpha spy?” Baron Frasier scoffed.


        “Because Baron,” Delfina said, “would you not rather punch Governor Vincere in the face instead?”


        “What heresy is this…” Baron Frasier said. “Did he send you? Because he’ll need more proof than just my dislike of him to oust me off this planet.”


        “I was thinking more about you wanting vengeance for what happened to your father.” Delfina said.


        “Choose your next words carefully researcher.” Baron Frasier said, his words laced with fury.


        “I came here for Noesteea’s support in an ISI invasion of Alpha Prime. If I convince you, I believe it will be enough to make the attack become a reality and end this war.” Delfina offered.


        “And should I refuse.” the Baron said.


        “Then we will be stuck in this war perpetually while Governor Vincere continues to amass his power and drown you in insignificance. I believe that benefits neither of us.” Delfina said.


        “So sure of yourself you are. A cocky Alpha.” Baron Frasier responded.


        “Think carefully. The end of this war means Noesteea has a chance to reclaim its pride. And…” Delfina added, “next time I come here for an interview I may actually say some positive things.”


        “Zefrora, Oslia and Chora are all supporting you? You spoke to the Duchess, the Duke and the Queen?” Baron Frasier said.


        “I have. And I have all of their support.” Delfina responded.


        “Tell me why this isn’t a giant trap then? Convince me that the second I send my war fleet that an Alpha fleet won’t just rain fire from the sky and cleanse this planet?” Baron Frasier asked.


        “I underestimated your dedication to your people Baron.” Delfina said.


        “I have my father’s blood within me.” the Baron said.


        “Well, Alpha Prime is the hub of the entire Alpha Empire command and control network. It does all the thinking, makes all the decisions. If that is taken out, no other Alpha force can possibly hope to achieve any sort of coordination for centuries. Enough to engage with whatever people remain on the buffer worlds and to end this bloodshed after a hundred long years.” Delfina said.


        The Baron remained quiet. He gritted his emerald teeth and clenched his fists against his head.


        “Yes. I’ll support the invasion. Noesteea’s ship’s will begin preparations.” the Baron said.


        “Excellent.” Delfina said. “We may yet see Noesteea returned to its former glory.”
        
        “No.” the Baron said. “Greater than it was.”


***


        Delfina walked past row after row of fertilized embryos. Invisible to the naked eye. Drifting in specialized medical tubes on one of Bryke’s many reproductive facilities. In the center of the facility, the Shogun of Bryke sat cross legged on a metal table, breathing deeply. Delfina dared not disturb his carefully calibrated breaths. Rather, she looked around the lab at the many automated processes keeping the new generation of humans alive and well. Further away she could see an older batch of fetuses the sizes of apples with mechanical umbilical cords sticking making their connection.
        After half an hour, Delfina became restless. She had to admit the lab unnerved her. It reminded her all too well of what life was like on Belusia before she left for Phoenix Station. She scarcely remembered anything except the actual facility. Every individual day was so similar to the next it felt like the first ten years of her life passed in the space of a week.
        But the very realization that the Shogun of Bryke sat across from her also made her feel on edge. He was the last head she truly had to convince, but it was no surprise he was totally loyal to the ISI and to the other heads. In return he had their respect and she couldn’t find an instance within the past fifty years of anyone objecting to something the Shogun had ordered.
        But here he was, ignorant of the world, barefoot and in only the simplest of linen clothing. And of course he had her come to the reproductive station of all places. The logic of these decisions escaped her. Of all the ISI head’s she researched, the Shogun was the hardest to understand. He often made decisions that adversely affected himself and made a point of communicating with the fewest amount of words possible. Everything about his mindset seemed utterly alien to Delfina. And she considered herself well versed in both the ISI and Alpha mindsets.
        Although her mind traced back to the conversation she had with Adam when he explained to her how disingenuous the ISI truly was. He specifically said that there was no uniform way of ISI thought. The different worlds were as different to each other as the people that inhabited them.
        Was it a surprise then that the ISI had it’s own civil war when it was composed of so many people? How could such a diverse group ever hope to unify under the shared hope of prolonged peace. Was she even on the right side? What if what Duke Folcher said was true, and the ISI would split again, resulting in yet another bloody interstellar war. But maybe that time it would be the last one, claiming all remaining lives the in the galaxy! She had to be sure but somehow her certainty escaped and…


        Where was the Shogun? He was no longer on the table.


        “I appreciate you waiting for me to finish. I must admit, few remain silent for so long without being told to do so.” the Shogun of Bryke said, startling Delfina.


“I didn’t see you there.” Delfina said.


“This place has a way of calming our senses and letting our guard down.” the Shogun said.


“Yes… it does.”


“Does it remind you of your childhood?” the Shogun continued.


“It does. How could you possibly know?” Delfina stammered.


“I wanted to show you that whatever you think of the ISI, we truly are not that different from the Alpha Empire. The people that make it up are just as soullessly birthed as you were.”  the Shogun said.


“But the ISI is completely different. You value humanity and— ” Delfina began.


“Yet the Alpha Empire is still composed of people. They are born the same way and they die the same way. Everything in between is uncertain, just as it is uncertain for us.” he said.


“Why do you look for so many similarities in the enemy? This seems like a pointless exercise” she asked.


The Shogun chuckled and motioned for her to follow him. “You will never defeat an enemy you don’t understand. And if the enemy is just like you. Than you must first understand yourself to make sure you do not become the enemy.”


“Like Count Lapsus of Xenon.” Delfina said.
        
        “What transpired then has haunted me to this very day. Events unfolded in such a way that I could not predict and was powerless to stop. And everyone involved was like you or I, a person. A breathing, thinking human with our own set of motives, emotions and subconscious driving factors.” he said.


        “But the responsibility was never your own. You never antagonized any of the leaders or forced any rash decision making.” Delfina said.


        “All that is necessary for evil to triumph is for good men to do nothing.” the Shogun said. “Whoever said that is buried by centuries of time. Unknown to all. Yet I find it is the truest thing ever spoken.”


        “Are you implying Count Lapsus was evil for continuing to colonize. Or the rest of the ISI for attacking Xenon?” Delfina asked.


        “Neither. Both did what they thought good. The real evil was the misinformation spreading between all of them that they could not coexist. And in that regard, I did nothing. You must be certain that this very same evil does not repeat itself before asking me your request.”


        “But there are no certainties if we commit to an invasion. I cannot be certain about any of this. I am not a strategist, nor a politician. I am a researcher who spent her entire life cracking communication.” Delfina said.


        “A lifetime with communication and you still don’t even understand why ISI censorship is in place.” the Shogun said.


        “To keep the ISI head’s in power no doubt.” Delfina said.


        “You must look deeper than that. You are so fixated on having the ISI take a leap of faith, yet you do not wish to take on yourself.”


        “To defeat the evil of miscommunication?” Delfina asked.


        “So you do understand. 


        “No. I don’t. You speak in all these riddles that every sentence confuses me more. How is censorship defeating miscommunication? It’s preventing communication in the first place!” Delfina said.


        The Shogun paused, leading the way out of the lab and into the lab’s courtyard. The air was warm and humid, but occasionally an ocean breeze rolled by and the humidity was temporarily cleansed.


        “Delfina. You and I both know that you are of special interest not only to the Alpha Empire and the ISI, but also to every world leader within the ISI.” 


        Delfina said nothing, well aware of the fact.


“But do not mistake this as permission to lose yourself to passion!” the Shogun suddenly said. “The time where you can hide under pretenses of social ignorance is over. You are responsible for everything you say and every action you take. Now, remember your goal. You came here to convince me of an invasion.”


Delfina knew he was right of course. But it wasn’t the Shogun’s ambiguous statements and endless questioning that drove her off the wall. She instantly traced her frustration to Dana, who she loathed and missed simultaneously. The Shogun also proved impossible to read, switching between the role of kind friend and lecturer effortlessly. She doubted those were the only two roles he could play and did not want to find out what a more aggressive role would look like. She looked around the courtyard, hoping the cliffside view would help her calm herself down. She noticed a woman in a simple tunic approach.


 “Minhua.” the Shogun smiled.


“Han Shogun.” Minhua replied with a smile and bowed before the Shogun before exchanging a quick hug.


“I have someone I would like you to meet Minhua.” the Shogun said, gesturing towards Delfina. “This is the famous Alpha Researcher: Delfina.”


“Hello Delfina. I have heard much about you.” Minhua said cheerlessly.


“Hello Minhua.” Delfina said sheepishly.


“And Delfina, this is Admiral Xin, soon to be Grand Admiral Xin if certain events play out correctly.” Shogun Han said.


“Grand Admiral? I apologize Admiral Xin. I don’t mean to be rude.” Delfina said.


“No need to worry.” Admiral Xin replied with a tight smile and calculating eyes.


“If you convince me Delfina, to support the launch of a full scale invasion, then Admiral Xin will lead it.”
“You’ve selected a leader already?” Delfina asked, perplexed.


“More than that Delfina.” Admiral Xin said. “We have the ships, logistics and men prepared for the attack.”


“But Bryke cannot hope to match the entirety of the Alpha Empire alone? You must wait for the other systems if I’m not mistaken.” Delfina said.


“You misunderstand, all the fleets are in place and awaiting the order.”  Admiral Xin said.


“Then my time here is meaningless if you already made up your mind.” Delfina said.


“Nothing is ever meaningless. I want you, as a former member of the Alpha Empire, to convince me exactly why you are betraying the very same political entity you pledged your allegiance too. Why you are putting your former fellow citizens in danger, and why you insist on dismantling the core institutions of the ISI.” the Shogun said.


That was certainly quite a bit of information to process. Why was she betraying the Alpha Empire? Was it betrayal if she never truly pledged her allegiance? That doesn’t even fully qualify a response. Why she was betraying her former citizens? All she was betraying was mindless drones that desired to extinguish humanity.
        But the last question. No doubt he meant her subliminal stunt with the interview. What could she answer to that? She really did just want the people of the ISI to know what they were getting into. To choose if they wanted to be a part of an interplanetary government that nearly fractured itself because of individual greed. But could she say that? The Shogun was there when it all happened. He couldn’t possibly be this altruistic saint he is portrayed as and still have control of an entire world.


        “The Alpha Empire is soulless. It’s core tenants have spiraled out of control and become corrupted under the sheer weight of the ISI’s onslaught. But I don’t just want to eliminate the Alpha Empire, I want to get rid of everything that spawned it in the first place.” Delfina said.


        The Shogun and Admiral Xin exchanged looks.


        “Would you be willing to die for this to happen?” Admiral Xin asked.


        A sudden feeling of fear ran through Delfina. There was no telling what Admiral Xin implied. But Delfina also knew the answer to that question.


        “Yes.”


        “Marshal your forces Admiral. I’ll gather the ISI world leaders.” Shogun Han said.


        Admiral Xin crooked her head a bit and her eyes became unfocused. For a moment she stood that way before returning to normal. “It seems Governor Vincere already called for a meeting.”


        ***


        Chapter 23: Chaos


        “Are all world leaders present?” Governor Vincere asked.


        Delfina watched him intently on the digital display. Alongside him were the digital representations of all the other leaders except Shogun Han. He sat less than a meter away from her.


        “We’re all here.” Shogun Han said.


        “Then let me begin by saying why I called us together… the researcher. What is this that I hear about the fugitive Alpha Researcher visiting each of you in person?” Governor Vincere asked.


        “We are preparing an invasion of Alpha Prime.” Queen Szwedko said, her voice filled with apathy, as if she preferred to be anywhere else.


        “Preparing an invasion of Alpha Prime.” Governor Vincere repeated. “and why the Hell would you be doing that! We had a deal! A plan for this, did we not? I know we are reaching quite past our natural lifespans but that’s no excuse to forget something quite so important!” Vincere shouted.


        “I also must raise a point that these meetings have been held in private. With a fugitive. Without advanced knowledge of the rest of us.” The High Judge of Typhon said. His face was like that of marble, lifeless and unnaturally sharp. He held his hands in such a way where only his fingertips touched. Had he been any more monotonous, Delfina would have assumed him to be a very realistic drone.


        “I do believe it is within our right as founders of the ISI to meet with whomever we please.” the Duke of Chora said.


        “She was an escaped fugitive of Gleron. The context of this situation is of quite some importance.” Governor Vincere said.


        “I never met with her.” the King of Zefrora said.


        “Neither did I.” the High Judge of Typhon said stoutly.


        “I didn’t have to, I pledged my full backing for an invasion without meeting with her.” the King of Zefrora continued.


        “How could you?” the High Judge of Typhon said, disdain all over his face.


        “Weitao, why would you support this motion?” Governor Vincere asked. “I thought we fully understood each other when we decided to isolate Alpha Prime before striking.”


        “A chance to end this war is not one that I can pass up. It should have ended long ago.” Shogun Han said. “Give it a rest Vincere. It’s time to finish this bloody business and have peace.”


        “Peace? Peace! We’ve had peace in the core worlds for decades now. Striking at Alpha Prime threatens to destabilize the entire Initiative? Does anyone else see this?” Governor Vincere said.


        “I am with you Governor.” the High Judge of Typhon said.


        “Does only Typhon stand with me?” Governor Vincere asked. “Did you really let that treasonous researcher poison your minds with these notions of peace? An invasion of this scope will end us. The Core worlds will be vulnerable to attack and the Alpha Empire will laugh at us as it decentralizes once more and regroups its strength on all its remaining planets. We must stay our current course of action if we hope to end this war and keep the ISI alive.”


        “Our combined fleet should be enough to end the threat safely. Am I wrong?” The Duke of Chora said.


        “What do we do in case of a counterattack?” The King of Zefrora asked.


        Everyone remained silent, thoughts entering and leaving their minds as to how best lead the ISI.


        “Now is not the time for doubt.” the Shogun said. “We strike swiftly, into the heart of our foes, and there will be nothing left to counterattack.”


        “I am not willing to risk my world on your blind confidence Shogun.” the High Judge of Typhon lamented.


        “Governor Vincere. You mentioned how the Alpha Researcher poisoned our minds and turned our collective vision against yours. Maybe it’s time you listen to see if it really is vile propaganda she spews. Or perhaps she speaks the truth of someone who has lived a dual life in both the Alpha Empire and ISI, subject firsthand to the horrors that occur when the two meet.” the Shogun said.


        Before Delfina realized what was happening, another display appeared alongside all the others. It was her. She got to see herself staring at herself with perhaps the most idiotic look she’d ever given herself. Definitely a great way to introduce herself into the conversation.


        “She was here this entire time? Should I just abdicate and cede my position to her right now? It’s as if you have lost your mind Weitao!” Governor Vincere said. “I know exactly what you are doing researcher. I don’t have the slightest clue how you convinced these other leaders to back an invasion but I see right through you.”


        “I didn’t have to convince them.” Delfina said. “Everyone here already wanted to end the war now. There is just no way that letting this conflict linger benefits anyone. Anyone except you of course.”


        “You level these accusations at me with no substantial backing. I’m disappointed you weren’t more thorough considering your lifeless heritage.” the Governor said.


        “But it’s obvious, the longer the war goes on, the more authority you can assert over colonies loyal to the ISI and prevent your power from being fractured.” Delfina said.


        “What is your conclusion then?” the Governor said.


        “That in order to keep as many worlds in your grip, you artificially prolong this conflict in hope that it drags out long enough for you to maintain total control of known space.” Delfina said.


        “Regardless of what you may think of me, I am no power hungry despot. Your logic is sound and yet your conclusion inherently flawed. You understand that these colonies I ‘maintain control over’ are ripe for independence. Letting the cycle unleash a new. I promise you, what you’ve seen and experienced on the front line is nothing. Nothing. Compared to the outset of this war. You cannot even imagine the horror of watching an entire system purged of life. Cities leveled in the matter of moments. I will never let that happen again.” Governor Vincere said.


        Delfina was stunned by the response. He spoke the truth and was right. Perhaps launching an invasion was sheer folly. Letting another war begin as soon as the previous one ended.


        But wait! What was she thinking? There is no possible way he could justify thousands of deaths every day just because the threat of another way. There is no quantifiable, reasonable way the ISI had such a light grip on its colonies. All of them were ISI citizens, with ISI military reporting and relying directly on the ISI. The Governor was a master manipulator. She had to remember that. And she couldn’t explain it, but she absolutely had to get the ISI to invade Alpha Prime.


        “You're wrong Governor. The ISI invasion will carry on. Alpha Prime will be destroyed and the Alpha legacy wiped from the galaxy. I cannot stand here and let thousands die daily just to satisfy your paranoid fears and delusions of grandeur. Like I said, none of these other leaders needed to be convinced, just told that it was truly possible. The Alpha Empire is beatable and it will be destroyed!” Delfina said, her voice. Her voice carried the pent up emotion of being powerlessly transferred from world to world, betrayed by her lover, subject to the death of everyone else she had known and lied to her entire life.


        “I just explained to you the dire implications of the attack. Not to mention the very real possibility of an Alpha attack as soon as our fleets leave. Leaders of the ISI, I implore you to look at this shell of a woman and see her for the Alpha spy she is. Truly the most exceptional Alpha covert operation in history!” Governor Vincere said.


        “She doesn’t look like a drone to me.” the Queen of Oslia said. “All fleets are accounted for except for your Governor. Should you choose to abstain from providing assistance, Admiral Xin has stressed she will still be able to take the objective, albeit with heavier casualties.”


        “Is this true?” Governor Vincere asked.


        “It is. The war is coming to an end. It is time we put our minds to work on what to make of this universe when the long night finally ends.” Shogun Han said.
        
        “At least delay the invasion one week. We need to be confident!” Governor Vincere said.


        “Do you not remember this same exact line of reasoning before you decided to annihilate Noesteea?” Shogun Han said. “We strike now.”


        “Agreed.” everyone but the High Judge of Typhon said.


        “Your forces will of course have the full support of Gleron.” Governor Vincere said. “My only request is that I be allowed to speak to Delfina alone. As soon as possible.”


        “That can be done.”


        He used her name. It sounded threatening just hearing it. Talking with him alone. That didn’t seem terribly prudent for her safety. 
        But it didn’t matter. It was happening. The invasion was going to be launched. The end of the war would come at last. She had succeeded. Finally, everyone in the Alpha Empire would be free.


***
        “There’s no way for me to get out of this?” Delfina asked.


        “It was a non-negotiable stipulation of Gleron’s support for the invasion. You must go to Gleron and speak with the Governor in person. As soon as you can.” Admiral Xin said. “I’m sure you aren’t in danger if that’s what you fear. Now if you excuse me, this is my last day before the invasion. I’d prefer to spend it with those I actually care about.”


        “My apologies. Thank you for making this happen.” Delfina said.


        “Nothing has happened yet. The only certainty in war is that nothing is certain.” Admiral Xin said, leaving.


        “Nonsense. They cannot possibly force you to travel to Gleron. It’s publicly known at this point of his hatred and distrust towards you. There is no way in the entirety of the multiverse that this will end well for you.” Durev said.


        “I know. But I won’t let my fear be the reason this invasion fails. If I have to die to prevent this bloody war from continuing for another decade, so be it. I’ve made peace with that long before.” Delfina said.


        ***


        “I’m glad you arrived.” Governor Vincere said.


        “If you want your vengeance now is a good time.” Delfina said. “As long as you keep your end of the deal.”


        “Vengeance? You still think of me as a selfish unbalanced individual. It doesn’t matter. I’m here to talk to you about your past. Specifically your escape from Alpha Prime.” Governor Vincere said.
        
        “You can read the logs. Before I was readmitted into the ISI they were quite thorough in making sure I wasn’t a threat.” Delfina said.


        “I want to hear it from you. You cannot begin to fathom how important this is.” Governor Vincere said.


        “Then tell me!” Delfina said.


        “I’m losing my patience and we are running out of time. Answer the damn question.” Governor Vincere yelled.


        “What! What do you want to know?” Delfina asked.


        “Who helped you get off?”


        “I don’t know. A conspirator of some sort. She kept sending messages, guiding me to leave.” Delfina said.


“How do you know it was a she?” the Governor asked.


“The last message sent was voice instead of text.” Delfina said.


“And what did that voice say?” Governor Vincere asked desperately. “All reports of it are missing.”


Delfina struggled to remember. It was a moment of her life she desperately tried to forget. “Vengeance. She talked about vengeance. Wiping out the enemy from the galaxy. Being there since the Alpha Empire first started.”


“What do you think of that?” Governor Vincere asked.


Delfina didn’t understand how he expected her to respond until she heard a voice from behind her.


“That’s definitely her. Even as part of that bastard machine planet she still can’t help with her signature flair of vengeance.” the voice said. It was intimately familiar. Masculine and seemingly all knowing.


Delfina turned around, coming face to face with none other than Count Lapsus. She struggled to say something but nothing came out.


“You’re certain.” Governor Vincere said.


“Yes. You’ve been duped. I told you to leave all this shit behind.” Count Lapsus said.


“How, what… you destroyed his world!” Delfina said.


“So I see you found out the rest of the story.” Count Lapsus said. “Let me wrap it up by saying everyone was at fault on that fateful day. It took the combined stupidity of the entire ISI to destroy Xenon. A core world no less. Four billion people gone just like that. We cannot let that happen again Governor. I’m certain it’s her, you absolutely have to bring back the fleet.”


“I have to be sure.” Governor Vincere said.


“Delfina, think very carefully. I cannot begin to explain how important it is that you explain truthfully. How did you get out? You were escorted by two drones to the transcendence chamber and then what?”


“And then I shot them with my survival pistol and escaped thanks to the spy! What is going on!” Delfina shouted.


“Dear God.” Governor Vincere said, slumping against the wall, utterly defeated.


“Delfina.” Count Lapsus said. “You never made it out.”


Delfina recoiled. Incapable of understanding the complete nonsense they were saying. ISI intelligence officials kept her for a week ensuring she was mentally sound and not subconsciously an Alpha sympathizer. They had been through this. She was an ISI citizen throughout. She wanted nothing but for the Alpha Empire to end. How could they even think of something like that. She was not a spy!


“I made it out! The embedded spy helped me get out!” Delfina yelled.


“That was no spy I’m afraid.” Count Lapsus said with a heavy heart.


“What! How? How could you possibly know?” Delfina asked, realizing that ultimately Count Lapsus was the founder of the Alpha Empire.


        “Delfina.” Count Lapsus said. “That spy was my wife. She controls the Alpha Empire.”


        Realization dawned on Delfina. But it was impossible. She remembered every single step of her escape. She advocated for the destruction of the Alpha Empire. It was impossible.


        “But I hate the Alpha Empire.” Delfina cried out.


        “I know. And she used that against you. The ISI just played directly in her hands.” Count Lapsus sighed.


        “Satcom station 3, send a message to recall the ISI combined fleet immediately.” Governor Vincere ordered into his datapad. “Highest priority!”


        “Affirmative governor. Launching com drone to Alpha Prime. Uh, Governor…” the surprised voice came from the com officer. “We lost communication with the drone.”


        “This is too damn important. Skip protocol and send all of them.” Governor Vincere commanded.
        “Well that’s the thing sir, they are all offline. I… I don’t think that’s possible.”


Governor Vincere lowered the datapad, realizing the inevitable doom about to be visited on his planet.


“Is it just Gleron?” he muttered.


“She’s going to hit all of them. I’m certain.” Count Lapsus said.


The ground began to shake violently. Explosions sounded off in the distance. Gunfire erupted in the streets below. The impossible had happened. An impossibly loud and clear message began broadcasting on repeat.


“Fellow citizens of the ISI! The forces stationed on this planet are Alpha sympathizers and are trying to overthrow us in a plot. We must strike first! Arm yourselves!”


“That’s it.” Governor Vincere laughed psychotically. “That’s the vector.”


“We need to find out what regiments are Alpha supporters!” Delfina said.


“No, you don’t understand, that message is the Alpha supporters. It’s so clear now. So clear. They knew everything. My attempt to keep communication channels clear. To prevent misinformation from leading to another war. And yet they used it against me. There’s just no beating a soulless machine.”  Governor Vincere said.


“Your people will visit death unto themselves because you didn’t trust them with the truth. How ironic…” Count Lapsus said.


“How ironic indeed.” Delfina said.


She had been the tool. The final Alpha weapon. The years on Phoenix Station crafting her to be carefully surrendered to the ISI. Contacting Count Lapsus to intercept the ship. Giving her a choice that her carefully groomed mind couldn’t refuse. Leading her to commit the entirety of the ISI navy to Alpha Prime. And it was all so perfectly logical.


Delfina often wondered if it was possible to completely predict human behavior without any doubt, leniency or tolerance. And now, as Gleron began to tear itself apart she finally got her answer.


But it did take a computer the size of a planet to figure it out.


        Delfina listened to the increasing violence outside. Perhaps she really was nothing more than a tool this whole time. All her free will… well it didn’t matter anymore. She had killed the ISI after all.














































































Epilogue:


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
Entering Alpha Prime System
20 days to Disintegration


Admiral Xin awoke from stasis. Instantly she stood, shaking off the disorientation and nausea that came with stasis and integrated with the Battleship Maul’s command interface on her way to the ship’s bridge. The moment she made it there, a holographic container withdrew from the ceiling and surrounded her.


A three dimensional representation came on the container and showed the rest of 1st Fleet leaving phase around her fleet. Further away was a silently rotating moon and even further than that, Alpha Prime. The monstrosity of a planet spun intimidatingly closest to the white dwarf at the center of the system. It was the largest object in view, just slightly larger than the slowly dwindling white dwarf.
It was the target. It was the enemy’s home base. It would be destroyed by the time this final campaign came to a close. Billions of lost souls would finally have their justice. Millions of soldiers were sacrificed to get them here. Dozens of cities and three planets were razed. Political blundering would no longer get in the way. The sole command of the operation was hers and she would wield it to decisively end the Alpha Empire. She clung to her anger for a tense moment more and then relaxed. Only a clear state of mind would prevail.


        She watched the faces of her subordinates appear as they integrated successfully through the command interface.
        
        Her executive officer, Lieutenant Griffon came on first.


        “I see you beat me to integration… again.” Griffon mused.


        “Always following in my footsteps.” Admiral Xin said with a wry smile.


        “How is my ship?” she added in a more serious tone.


        “Battle ready and eager.” Griffon replied without hesitation, “all systems running on optimal and crew are ready.”


        Admiral Griffon queried her navigation officer. “What do we have?”


        After a brief delay, the chief navigation officer replied carefully, “probes launching as we speak. Sensors have picked up a massive amount of ships clustered around Alpha Prime. Preliminary scans show that they are arrayed in defensive formation. A significantly smaller amount of activity has been detected around the second largest planet.”


        “Steele, Douglas, Velen, did you catch that?” Admiral Xin asked the commanders of 2nd, 3rd and 5th fleet respectively.


        “Affirmative, they were waiting for us.” Admiral Velen said.


        “My thoughts exactly.” Admiral Xin replied.


        “Cheeky bastards.” Commodore Steele said, rubbing his chin.


        “How can you be so certain?” Commodore Douglas replied.


        “Certain no. Confident yes. We know Alpha spies have infiltrated deep into our network.” Admiral Xin said.


        “It is only logical.” Admiral Velen added.


        “Alright enough with the gossip.” Admiral Xin said in a starkly more serious tone. “Arrange your fleets into formation and signal me when you are done.”


***
Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
In defensive formation, Alpha Prime System limits
20 days to Disintegration


“Alright, how are all my boys and girls doing?” Captain Moore asked his XO. 


“Everyone’s awake, fusion core running at 13% captain. All crew are at their battlestations, weapons ready.” Moore’s XO replied.


“Excellent. I’m surprised we didn’t get shot to pieces just entering this shitshow.” Captain Moore said.


“Sir?” the lieutenant said.


“Jumping blindly into a system. That’s what I am referring to in case you misunderstood.” Captain Moore said sarcastically. 


“I’m sure the admiral has her reasons.” the lieutenant said carefully.


“Oh, I have no doubt about that. I’m sure it was a sound strategic decision. I just don’t like it. Too much of a chance of us all getting shot down at the same time.” Captain Moore explained.


“Of course sir.” the XO sighed.


“But! We are alive and well, my ship is going great and we are sure to get into the thick of it. What’s not to love?” Captain Moore reassured.


“I am not sure if you are being sarcastic. Regardless I personally am prepared to end the Alpha Empire.” the lieutenant said firmly.


“Save your altruistic warcry for the battle. Be happy that Admiral Xin actually got authority to get this party started. Those pansy System Heads back home have been denying us attacks left and right. When I heard that we found the coordinates of Alpha Prime I still wasn’t sure if we could launch an assault! How crazy is that?” Captain Moore exclaimed. He ignored the XO’’s nod of agreement and transmitted to Captain Wolfe, another captain within the same squadron.


“Hey Wolfe, what do you think so far?” Captain Moore asked, his face showing a mockery of excitement.


“I think that only one of us is actually taking this seriously at all. We are at the gates of Hell man! This is the final culminating battle. After this, the Alpha Empire is gone!” Captain Wolfe said.


“Okay. No, I get the excitement for all this but sensor sweeps are clear for the next hundred million kilometers. I’m just being realistic here. We’ll get an order in, two… three hours the soonest.” Captain Moore said.


“Don’t you have a squadron to run?” Captain Wolfe said.


“Wolfe, you know as well as I do that I work very hard to make sure I don’t have to work hard. Besides, you are part of my squadron. I’m running it now by speaking to you.” Captain Moore grinned.


—————————————————————————————————————-
NOT DONE
—————————————————————————————————————-
***


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
Entering Alpha Prime System
18 days to Disintegration




“All ships in system and ready with the exception of one reclamation vessel.” Lieutenant Griffon reported.


“What’s the status of that vessel?” Admiral Xin inquired.


“Slight fusion core instability, it is repowering now.” the XO said.


Admiral Xin scanned all the reports one more time briefly and with a deep breath opened a channel to every ship in the first, second, third and fifth fleets. 


“Brave men and women of the ISI, this is Admiral Xin speaking. Today we begin a campaign in which we hope will end the threat of the Alpha Empire once and for all. We have brought with us overwhelming firepower, the finest from all our eight worlds and war fervor so great that machines could never hope to match. We are done assaulting Alpha backwater worlds and their brainwashed populaces. Do not hesitate. Remember what these inhuman machine transcendentalists bastards did to our worlds. We will attack them. We will defeat them. We will erase them from existence. Squadron commanders, orders will be coming soon. Good luck to us all. Xin out.”


Admiral Xin closed her eyes after ending the transmission and opened them once more to see the other fleet commanders awaiting her orders. She mirrored her command display to each of their own displays located within their own ships and began by pointing to the closest and least defended planet.


“This dwarf planet, designated Alpha 2, houses an Alpha Empire garrison of unknown size. However, sensors and battle estimations predict it is fairly small. Commodore Steele, take 2nd Fleet and secure that planet. I am authorizing a full orbital bombardment. 1st and 2nd destroyer squadrons of first fleet will screen and engage any reinforcements. Is that understood?”


“Yes sir.” Commodore Steele replied.


“Now the second dwarf planet, Alpha 3, is much more heavily defended. Commodore Douglas, I want you to take third fleet and remain within strike distance. You will wait for further intel before clearing that planet. Admiral Velen, escort her with fifth fleet and reinforce as necessary.”


“Yes sir.” Commodore Douglas and Admira Velen responded.


“Primary force makeup orbiting Alpha Prime is still unknown. Our intel is being jammed visually and there are too many vessels to accurately distinguish between them. However, we are certain that the majority of the enemy forces are orbiting that planet and that the Alpha Empire defector has given us an estimate of upwards of two hundred enemy warships. Whatever information we are currently able to glean points to the same number.”


She noted the mixed reactions of everyone when she mentioned the defector, Delfina. Regardless of what she had done or anyone thought, she had given them reliable intelligence and that was all that mattered now.


“The plan is to secure Alpha 2 and Alpha 3 to prevent flanking attacks. First fleet will remain unengaged and instead prevent any reinforcements or retreat to or from these planets. Once these planets are taken and we have up to date reliable scans of Alpha Prime, we will encircle it and launch a direct assault. There is no running for them now so we have no need to rush. Dismissed.”
***


Garen Wolfe
Captain - Undying Scorn
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
In transit to Alpha 2
17 days to Disintegration


“How is the crew feeling?” Captain Wolfe asked his XO; Lieutenant Hudson. Both of them calmly walked through the main hall of the destroyer, receiving salutes from nearby crew members that attended to their duty.


“Like the rest of us I presume.” Lieutenant Hudson replied. “Anxious but willing to put the Alpha bastards in their graves.”


“I defer to Admiral Xin’s authority of course.” Captain Wolfe said, drawing closer to his XO. “But between you and I, I’d much rather take the whole fleet at once and blast our way to the planet while dropping every nuke we have. All this strategic meandering is making me restless. Every second they survive is another second my homeworld is in danger.”


“I echo your sentiments Captain,” Lieutenant Hudson replied carefully, “but we cannot fail here.”


“Of course you are right… it is difficult to fight rationally against an enemy with no honor, morality or soul. Every nerve in my body is screaming to kill them yet I sit here, surrounded by metal, in the void of space, thousands of kilometers away from them.” Captain Wolfe said.


At that moment Captain Wolfe’s neural implant showed that Captain Moore was transmitting to him. He motioned to Lieutenant Hudson and the Lieutenant saluted and left. Wolfe walked straight to the currently vacant bridge.


“Wolfe here, anything wrong?” he answered.


“Nope.” Came Captain Moore’s reply.


Captain Wolfe frowned, “we still have another two days until contact. Please do not tell me you will continue communicating with me for no reason. This isn’t a casual operation like our previous campaigns.”


“Whoa Captain Wolfe! Just because nothing is wrong does not mean something could potentially be wrong.” Captain Moore replied in earnest.


“What is it then Captain Moore?” Captain Wolfe finally asked.


        “This feels exactly like a ‘casual’ campaign though. It’s making me uneasy.” Captain Moore said.


        “You make me uneasy Moore. Don’t you have your XO to bother with this talk?” Wolfe said.


        “He just nods as if he understands.” Moore said.


        “And you expect me to do the same? I really hope there is a point to this so far pointless exchange.” Wolfe said.


        Captain Moore paused, contemplating his next words. “You ever speak to someone rehabilitated from the Alpha Empire?”


        “No.” Captain Wolfe replied.


        “Machines. All of them. Flesh on the outside but inside, the way they calculate and approach everything. Just like a machine.” Captain Moore said.


        “We’ve had this discussion before. So far it seems like a borderline conspiracy theory.” Captain Wolfe replied.


        “You wanted a point? Here it is: what is the Alpha Empire up to?” Captain Moore asked earnestly.


        “Destroying everything we stand for, murdering our citizens or turning them into psychopathic tools several generations later... or in other words: being despicable fucks.” Captain Wolfe replied, pacing up and down the length of the Undying Scorn’s bridge.


        “Okay, you are right about them being bastards, but what is their end game here? We’ve got more ships than them and we are slowly encircling Alpha Prime. They have no reinforcements, no allies, nothing. Their barrier worlds are almost useless and mostly conquered.” Captain Moore said.


        “You make it sound like we already won.” Captain Wolfe said.


        “But what if they know something we don’t? This entire past decade the Alpha Empire has managed to stage a handful of devastating hit and run strikes and that is it. No land was taken. No resources are being acquired. They have less ships than us. Less soldiers and less firepower. Say what you will about them, but they are smart calculating bastards. I don’t think that they will just fight this one out and then give up. Feels wrong and too easy.” Captain Moore said.


        Captain Wolfe thought for a while and took a deep breath. “I don’t think you are wrong Moore, but I also don’t think I need to hear this right now, or anyone for the matter. In two days when we make contact and people start dying, and they will, you tell me everything is too easy. We have a job to do. We have this campaign to win, you can’t keep thinking about the grand scheme when we are about to go into combat.”


        Captain Moore sighed and conceded, “alright you made a good point.”


        “Have you spoken to anyone else about this?” Captain Wolfe asked.


        “No. Only you because I trust you.”


        “Then trust me when I say that you should not spread your theories.” Captain Wolfe said.


        As he terminated the transmission he sat down in his command chair and stared out into the blackness of space, eyes unfocused and hands slightly trembling.


***


Scarlet Dauss
Acting Captain - Helping Hand
1st Fleet, Rear Group Repair
In transit with 1st Fleet to Alpha Prime
17 days to Disintegration


“In the name of the ISI, do you have any standards you adhere to?” Captain Dauss shouted at a civilian engineer.


        She crouched in the engine section of the Helping Hand, watching the engineer frantically try to restart the fusion core for the third time. As that engineer lay on the ground, running diagnostics and visually checking the core and its containment units, another keyed directly into the console and checked to make sure all of the core’s vitals were still functional. She had just been transferred before the campaign to take command of this ship. While technically the Helping Hand and its crew were civilians from Noesteea, the campaign needed its repair ability and gave it a military captain.
        Captain Dauss was the person charged with this duty, and she was horrified at just how poorly run and maintained the ship was. The laziness of its previous civilian captain was readily apparent and gave that much more reason to replace him. The Helping Hand was the only ship in the entire fleet that was not ready for battle after entering the system. She had to humiliatingly report that her ship was incapable of advancing with the rest of the fleet. Her ship was left trying to restart its fusion core with a single destroyer escort while the rest of the fleet slowly made way for Alpha Prime.


        “Why the hell would you not recalibrate the magnetic field alignment before we entered phase?”
        
        The engineer using the terminal, trying to restart the reactor replied nervously to, “we never had to before— “


        “Say ‘we never had to before’ one more time!” Captain Dauss yelled. “I dare you. This, among with fixing every other screw up you made thanks to your laziness is now standard procedure. That means if it is not done you are off duty and off pay.”


        “Of course.” the engineer replied.


        “Of course sir. This is a military vessel now and I am your superior. It’s about damn time this ship learned some discipline.” Captain Dauss said angrily. She activated her communication device and transmitted to the rest of the ship. “Thanks to the stupidity and laziness of crew members Rodney and Terraline, we are now several hundred kilometers behind the rest of 1st fleet. If anyone else fucks up, this ship is going to be disbanded as soon as you return to Noesteea. This is war people! Get your heads out of your asses. If one of you fails at your duty you will get the rest of us killed.”


As she finished her brief rant, she was hailed from the destroyer left behind to escort them. “Helping Hand, any status updates on the core?”


Captain Dauss replied as calmly as she could, “fusion core still inoperable, expect another hour delay.”


“Alright Helping Hand… take your time…” the destroyer’s captain mocked.


Captain Dauss let out a yell and pulled her hair in frustration. What had she done to deserve this miserable ship.


***
Fredrick Steele
Commodore - Battleship Righteous Vengeance
2nd Fleet, Command Echelon
Entering range of Alpha 2
13 days to Disintegration


“First and second strike groups deploy in stutter formation — carriers at the rear. Deploy all fighters. Auxiliary group; defensive formation around the carriers. Nothing gets through to them. Destroyer group one, I want a tight formation on the Righteous Vengeance: we are going to pierce right through to their primary battlestation. First and second groups form on the flanks and engage all secondary targets. Destroyer group two, form at extreme length and ensure they cannot retreat.”


Commodore Steele watched the ships of the second (and part of first) fleet slowly maneuver into position. Had he looked through a window he would have been almost able to see the outlines of the four destroyers aligning themselves around his battleship: Righteous Vengeance.
        But of course, he had no windows to look out of. Instead, his tactical display showed all his ships spread out over almost five thousands kilometers; a crescent circle preparing to envelope Alpha 2. 
        The dwarf planet itself had a dusty orange hue to it and was fairly dark because of its distance from the white dwarf at the center of the system. Scans showed almost no atmosphere and certainly no life. It appeared to have at least some resources. Most likely rare metals as evidenced by the drilling equipment detected on the planet’s surface.
        Aside from mining operations, the Alpha Empire put a moderate force in orbit above the system. Mostly defensive satellites with missile pods, gun turrets or hangars. In the case of the battle station orbiting, it had plenty of all three and was the only thing Commodore Steele felt posed a threat. Other than that he spotted a handful of frigates and corvettes, nothing his home fleet would have a problem with.


        He leaned back from the display, instinctively attempting to scratch his chin in thought. But the motion was interrupted by the space suit he wore and instead his hand bumped against the thick armor of his armor’s face plate. He locked his hands behind his back and gazed at all the miniscule symbols arrayed before him. 
        His ships had almost finished moving into position, their sizes ranging from the massive battleship he stood in of the command echelon to the fast and nimble corvettes of the auxiliary fleet. All except destroyer group two were Brykean. Brave men and women, all from the great world of Bryke, crewed them and he felt a swell of personal pride. His fleet was unmatched in martial prowess and loyalty and he knew they would see the campaign to its bitter end. Today was the first engagement of many and he wanted… needed, for it to be a win. Not only a win, but a win that saw as many of his fellow Brykeans come out of the battle as went into it. Casualties were inevitable in war, but that didn’t make the dead weigh any less heavily on him.
        Soon, Commodore Steele would give the order to initiate the attack. Everytime he stared at what his fleet’s sensors detected he attempted to see if there was a better option. A safer plan of attack. But there were none. Not everyone would return back to Bryke. Whatever mistakes were made in the ensung chaos of battle would rest on his shoulders. And he was ready.


        “All fleets ready.” his XO reported.


        Commodore Steele took a deep breath. “The time is upon us, let us make Bryke proud. All ships depressurize and initiate attack.”


All ships within 2nd Fleet absorbed the air within themselves until there was nothing left but vacuum and determined ISI crewmembers wearing their space suits in zero gravity. If any hull breaches were to occur, the ship would continue fighting.
A moment later, all ships accelerated sharply with Righteous Vengeance leading them right into the heart of the Alpha Empire defensive positions.
 
        “Launch first salvo, see if any get through.” Commodore Steele ordered.


        The battleship launched forty missiles and the four destroyers around it each launched a dozen, sending them streaking fast towards the enemy ships. Almost all the Alpha ships responded in kind and sent their own volley of nuclear missiles loose at the Righteous Fury.


        “Main guns, sight on the battle station. Destroyer group one, close up formation and prepare point defense. Strike groups, engage enemy forces!” Commodore Steele ordered.


        “More missile launches, all heading towards us!”


        Commodore Steele tightened his grip around his seat. Alpha forces already knew they would lose the battle. They were just trying to destroy the largest ship opposing them. Commodore Steele feared they might have launched too many missiles to counteract.


        “Kill our acceleration and deploy defensive satellites! Keep the destroyers in front of us.” Commodore Steele said. “Prepare to fire defensive missiles.”


        The Righteous Fury slowed down and its escort destroyers shot ahead along with small defensive satellites armed with defensive point defense lasers. Further away from the Righteous Fury, ISI strike groups began exchanging vicious fire with Alpha forces.
        The first salvo from the Alpha Empire streamed right next to the ISI destroyers that had charged on ahead and were quickly neutralized by their point defense lasers. The second, much larger salvo, was quickly approaching.


        “Fire defensive missiles now!” the commodore yelled.


        Several dozen defensive missiles shot out of the battleship and locked onto the approaching missiles. The Alpha Empire missiles numbered around several hundred, the missile might of their entire fleet headed straight at the Righteous Fury. The escort destroyers accurately neutralized dozens of the missiles, either setting them off in furious orange blasts or rendering them into an inert molten mass.
        The remaining missiles continued past the destroyers and fell prey to the defensive satellites which tracked and fired their lasers astonishingly fast. But their laser capacitors quickly failed and the satellites began emitting energy signatures like that of the Righteous Fury itself. Several confused missiles detonated on the satellites but almost a hundred more continued on towards the battleship.
        The defensive missiles impacted and their explosions and EMP effects knocked out almost all of the remaining missiles. Only two dozen were left to strike their target. The battleship’s point defense lasers rotated swiftly and began annihilating the missiles at extreme close range.


        Commodore Steele held his breath as he watched several missiles come dangerously close. The defense lasers were lashing out and detonating the incoming missiles as fast as possible in a brilliant show of lights and flashes, but three missiles made it within a kilometer. The point defense lasers detonated all three barely five hundred meters from the ship. The ship itself rocked viciously and the Commodore felt its super structure vibrate under the pressure of the nuclear missile detonations.
        The vibrations stopped and Commodore Steele exhaled, hearing a lot of the crew cheer into the communication channels.


        “Main guns, fire!” he shouted.


        The three most massive railguns of the Righteous Fury, finally within striking range of the Alpha Battle Station, let loose their powerful ordinance. The shadow of a grin appeared on Commodore Steele’s face as all three projectiles found their targets and tore brutally into the battlestation seconds after being fired.
The fighters of both strike groups on either side of Righteous Fury closed in from the sides onto the Alpha battle station and nearby Alpha forces. They opened fire on the nearby enemy satellites and frigates. Alpha fighters rushed to defend their ships from the deadly ISI fighters.
Further away, ISI cruisers and destroyers from both strike groups exchanged fire with Alpha frigates and defended themselves from the numerous defensive satellites firing on them. The much more powerful ISI cruisers tore into the smaller Alpha Empire frigates. The metal carcasses of ships began descending onto Alpha 2. Their impacts further scarred the already cratered moon.


        The Righteous Fury launched a volley of special “vanquishing” missiles with higher yields intended to utterly annihilate a wounded foe. The Alpha battle station, as formidable as it was, could hardly stand to the full might of an ISI battleship. It’s primary guns continued to penetrate the station’s armor and wreck havoc in its interior.
        The station was forced to use auxiliary reactors and many of its defensive capabilities were already inoperable. When the missile volley from Righteous Fury came into range, the station made a pathetic last stand with its point defense lasers to try and eliminate the incoming missiles. But it failed and the missiles impacted.


        Anyone looking through an optics device would have instantly lost sight. The flash and energy were so immense that only a completely unrecognizable glowing cluster of debris was left where the station was. Sensors had to momentarily compensate for the unexpected energy. A handful of drone fighters within five kilometers completely stopped functioning. Their systems overloading from the surge of radiation. They listed lazily, a few of them dropping slowly towards Alpha 2.


        Commodore Steele gave a little smirk as he watched the enemy battle station disappear. “All units, excellent job. Now finish them off.”


***
Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, 
Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
Extreme range of Alpha 2
13 days to Disintegration


        “Looks like they took down the station. Things are going well for the Brykeans.” Captain Moore said.


        “I’m just hoping all their ships are still fine.” Captain Wolfe said.


        “Same. Sensors don’t seem to be showing any major casualties.” Captain Fresca replied.


        Captain Moore sat patiently, strapped down in zero gravity, but still supporting his chin with his arm, eyeing the battle. 2nd destroyer squadron was tasked to hunt down any ships that attempted to flee Alpha 2 and regroup with the main Alpha fleet. So far there were none. Alpha Forces were known for their unwillingness to retreat. This proved incredibly disturbing but it did make Captain Moore’s job easier at the moment.


        “With the station down, they will most likely retreat now if ever. Not much else left for them above that moon.” Captain Regald stated.


        “Just keep your eyes on the prize. The rest of the fleet says no reinforcements are coming for them. It makes strategic sense for them to retreat.” Captain Moore said.


        Almost as if on cue, three Alpha frigates veered away from the battle and started on a clear course back to Alpha Prime.


        “Alright there it is! Stay in formation and plot an intercept course at 32 degrees, same quadrant. Let’s nail them nice and clean.” Captain Moore said.


        Quickly the ISI destroyers, fast, agile and deadly, closed in on the Alpha frigates. Realizing they could not outrun the ISI destroyers, the three frigates changed formation and directly faced their enemy.


        “Regald, Wolfe, Fresca, do a three point maneuver on the left flank. The rest with me right flank. Get into position quickly or we will be vulnerable!” Captain Moore said.


        The three point maneuver ensured that an enemy ship had no choice but to expose its more vulnerable side to at least one friendly ship. The front of a ship was the smallest, most armored target and also the location of the majority of its weapons. The strategy worked to great effect against outnumbered or less maneuverable foes.


        The counter was for all enemy ships to focus fire on one friendly ship, making the tactic fairly unorthodox and unpopular.


        “Enemy ships are accelerating towards me.” Captain Regald said calmly.


        “I hear you, pull back and keep your front to them. Let them become enveloped by the rest of the squadron.”


        “The rest of you, engines to 200 percent! We will not let them catch Regald alone!”


        Captain Regald’s ship pulled back as fast as it could but it had to kill its momentum before it could travel in another direction, putting it dangerously close to the enemy frigates that accelerating quickly.


        “Captain Moore, we are in range!” Captain Wolfe said.


        “Open fire! Open fire! Light them up!” Captain Moore yelled. Sweat had begun collecting on him under his armor over the fear of losing Regald. 


        All the ISI destroyers opened fire with their railguns and let loose a swarm of missiles at the enemy frigates. But to their surprise, the enemy frigates immediately killed their momentum and turned dangerously quickly. Almost to the point that the ships were sheared in half by centripetal forces. All railgun shots missed but the missiles corrected themselves and continued heading to their destination.
        With the sudden turn however, the enemy frigates had put themselves incredibly close to Captain Fresca’s ship and she had no way of escaping because her forward velocity was so great. The frigates opened fire with their railguns and scored direct hits across Captain Fresca’s relatively fragile destroyer.


        “My ship has sustained heavy damage! I have hull breaches on multiple decks, armor integrity is gone!” Captain Fresca cried out.


        “Fresca, abandon your ship now! You have ninety seconds until enemy missiles hit you. Go, go go! All ships do not let them get off a second volley. Neutralize them!” Captain Moore ordered.


        The missile volley launched by the destroyers closed in on the frigates, which seemed to completely shut off. Not a single point defense laser fired at the incoming missiles and the ships were struck. Blinding flashes completely engulfed the enemy ships and they disappeared.


***


Angelina Fresca
Captain - Destroyer Norsica
2nd Destroyer Squadron
Extreme range of Alpha 2
13 days to Disintegration


        “Get a goddamn move on! We have sixty seconds go go go!” Captain Fresca yelled to a crewmember behind her. They were frantically grabbing all nearby hand holds and launching themselves straight towards the tiny hangar of the destroyer. Every destroyer had two shuttles for repairs, inter-ship transportation, landing and emergencies. The shuttles were their only way out. 
        Captain Fresca passed a crew member that had been in the path of a railgun. There was nothing left but a red mist floating in the air and coating what was left of the hall. There was a gaping hole punctured right through the heart of the ship, the black void of space peering in on them. She grabbed a red stained handhold and kept pushing forward, trying not to think who that had been.
        She reached the hangar bay and saw one of the shuttles had been completely shorn in two by a massive piece of shrapnel. The other one seemed fine and at least one crewmember had already started the countdown from within. She pushed off the nearest ledge and floated straight into the shuttle climbing in and noting morbidly that their were only two people inside. No one else had made it. She heard nothing, but she felt vibrations travel through her arm from her hold onto the shuttle. She saw the ship straining as it was beginning to twist apart. She had no choice.


        “Launch the ship!” she cried out.
        The shuttle flew out of the hangar at maximum speed to get away from the impending missiles. Captain Fresca winced as the missiles hit her ship, completely annihilating every trace of it. Eight souls were instantly lost. Two thirds of her crew gone.


***


Fredrick Steele
Commodore - Battleship Righteous Vengeance
Commander 2nd Fleet
2nd Fleet, Command Echelon
Entering range of Alpha 2
13 days to Disintegration


        “Commodore! Three enemy frigates have pulled away, destroyer group 2 is closing in on them now.”


        “Excellent.” Commodore Steele calmly said. As he replied, he saw missile launches coming from the surface of Alpha 2.


        “Missile launches detected!”


        Commodore Steele patched his communications to the rest of the fleet.


        “”All units, initiate class five surface bombardment. Wipe them out. All of them.”


        Surface bombardments were immensely deadly, the gravity of a planet or moon only served to increase its severity. Class one bombardments could level a city in seconds. Class three bombardments could destroy the infrastructure of an entire continent. Class five bombardments were only recently declared legal against the Alpha Empire. They were designed to utterly wipe a planet of all life and had only been used once prior.


        After the most miniscule of pauses, the turrets of every ship in second fleet turned and aimed at the moon. A handful of Alpha defensive satellites and fighters still existed in the periphery but they were of no consequence. Now the only priority was the destruction of Alpha 2. 
        
        All the ships in the fleet fired in the space of less than a second. The tungsten rods slammed into the moon with titanic forces. Every single shot caused the ground to rip open and for kilometer wide crevices to instantly form across the surface. The innards of the planet spilled out high into space. For a groundside spectator that had impossibly survived the writhing of the moon itself, it would appear as if volcanoes were instantly bursting from the very core of the moon. Volley after volley of rounds slammed into the moon, ravaging it and causing entire mountains to break free and rise into space. The ISI 2nd fleet began to slowly pull back from the planet while maintaining fire to avoid the slowly expanding chunks of the moon. With the first phase completed, the ships began to concentrate on very specific spots on the planet, unleashing a hellstorm of railgun fire and creating supermassive rifts in the moon, drilling deep. After a minute of this focused fire, the Righteous Fury initiated the third stage of the bombardment. It fired its most powerful missiles deep into the rifts. The eyes of the fleet waited anxiously until the missiles exploded deep underground. Fissures spawned across the entirety of the moon, transforming it into a tectonic nightmare. They watched as these fissures filled with flame, causing the remnants of the moon to shatter and drift into the coldness of space.


        Commodore Steele watched with a distant expression. The moon had been killed. He had become the destroyer of worlds.
        
        ***
Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
In transit to Alpha Prime
12 days to Disintegration


        
“Commodore excellent job. Patch your ships up and link up to the rest of the 1st fleet.” Admiral Xin ordered.


“Understood Admiral. Commodore Steele out.”


Admiral Xin paused for a moment to reflect on their current strategic situation. The repair ships were currently with 2nd fleet, repairing the damage sustained destroying Alpha 2. Two destroyers had been completely lost, all things considered a complete victory considering the Alpha losses of over a dozen frigates and all the other military forces on Alpha 2.


3rd and 5th fleet under the command of Commodore Douglas were poised to capture Alpha 3. Soon they would be able to concentrate all their firepower on Alpha Prime and wipe the Alpha scourge away.
 Admiral Xin could scarcely imagine what that would feel like. What would happen afterwards. For decades the Alpha Empire had marauded the ISI. Terrorized colonies and caused widespread fear. If she ended the battle here… no… when she ended the battle here, that fear would be gone. They would be able to colonize once more, focus away from the war effort and start exploring the rest of the universe as the ISI was always meant to. Eventually she would retire and return to her love. 


But none of that was possible if she failed to eliminate the Alpha Empire right here and now. This battle would signify the culmination of a war that stretched for too long and claimed too many lives. Even though the thought of the enemy and all they had wrought sickened her, she was relieved by just how much everyone else in the fleet hated the Alpha Empire. Aside from the rear elements, 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 5th fleets were all hardened veterans. Many of them had been taking back barrier worlds from the Alpha Empire since the beginning.
1st fleet was the first fleet to actually engage the Alpha Empire so many years ago. 2nd and 3rd fleets were the home fleets of Bryke and Oslia respectively. Both those planets hosted proud martial traditions that extended to their fleets. And of course 5th fleet, consisting of a single dreadnaught and its escorts, had the largest warship ever constructed in history. A single one of its turrets could break a battlecruiser in half.


“Admiral, a probe just came into the system. It has an urgent message.” her comm officer said.


“Okay, send it to me.”


She paused as a written report came to her:


 Alpha forces spotted on Noesteea.


The rest of the message detailed an assortment of reports indicating a scattering of Alpha Empire sleeper cells staging attacks across the planet. This reeked of nothing more than minor terrorism, but Admiral Xin was in charge of the ISI’s military and all military matters had to be sent to her. However, the message still made her very uneasy. An attack of any scale on an ISI home planet had not occurred since the start of the Alpha War. It may have been just a last ditch effort to divert forces away from the campaign against Alpha Prime. No matter. The local defense forces should be able to deal with the issue. They had hardly left those planets undefended.


They had the firepower and they had the will to win. That was what mattered. Her tactical decisions were sound. Her strategic approach thus far successful. This is how it needed to be. The ISI needed to come together and end the Alpha threat entirely.


No matter the cost.


***
Scarlet Dauss
Acting Captain - Helping Hand
1st Fleet, Rear Group Repair
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2
9 days to Disintegration


“What’s taking so long?” Captain Dauss asked the repair team floating wieghtlessly outside.


The Helping Hand was docked right alongside a destroyer that had taken a shot into its fusion core. It was relying on auxiliary power to maintain itself until the core could be made operational again. Because the damage was not entirely severe, the captain of the destroyer had assured Captain Dauss that the core could be repaired.
Several large mechanical clamps jutted from the side of the Helping Hand and were in the process of repairing the exterior armor of the destroyer. The biggest priority was just to make it airtight so the crew could start walking and breathing again normally. It wouldn’t be able to take a direct hit however, that would have to wait until an actual shipyard could fix it.
The repair team sent to bring the fusion core online was already taking far more hours than it was supposed to.


“Captain Dauss, this is Captain Nace, is everything proceeding okay?”


Captain Dauss responded quickly, “the repair crew is taking longer than anticipated.”


“I haven’t seen them go into the core for quite some time. I just wanted to make double check.” Captain Nace responded.


Captain Dauss’s eyes widened and she attempted to keep her breath under control.


“Thank you Captain Nace.” she said as casually as she could. She ended the communication line and hailed the repair team once more.


“Repair team. I want a status right now.” she said.


A few seconds later came a reply. “Uh, small complication. It will take us some more time. We aren’t sure if we will be able to fix it.” 


“So what is the issue?” Captain Dauss said with an icy calm.


“The uh… core system module is damaged. Not sure if we can repair it.”


Captain Dauss smiled to herself before yelling, “are you absolutely CERTAIN that has nothing to do with how you haven’t even gone inside the damn core?”


“Well you see… there is a small radioactive leak.” the repair crewman said.


“You cowards! All of you! Get in the damn fusion core, fix it, or you’ll be court martialed right here and now!” Captain Dauss threatened.


“We are civilians. We can’t be court martialed.” the voice replied confidently.


“You are in the ISI military right now! We can have you executed for disobeying an order.” she yelled, and then added with disgust, “and I will execute you personally if you say another word.”


        ***


Fans Nagota
Head Doctor - Medship One
1st Fleet, Rear Group Repair
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2
9 days to Disintegration


        The previously empty, white beds of Medship One were currently filled with a dozen figures, all injured to some degree. Their armor had to be carefully removed and their wounds surgically taken care of to ensure they would survive. Doctor Nagota was told that his goal was to have these injured patients return to fighting shape as soon as possible. The ridiculousness of that objective had struck him like a dumb joke. But his superiors were serious.
Somehow he was to take the woman in front of him: missing half her face, multiple fractures all along her body and a missing leg, and make her able to not only walk within a week, but fight as well. Keeping them alive was apparently not enough anymore.
He sighed. The medical equipment on Medship One was good, and he was even better. But the amount of pain he would have to put these people through to get them to fighting condition would be incalculable. He wasn’t sure if any of them would live anything resembling a normal life after this, even if they were able to undo all the modifications he was about to do. They were already dead in his eyes, but the ISI wasn’t done with them. His heart grew heavy but his hands set to work calibrating his surgical instruments.


“Another group just arrived Doctor Nagota. Straight from a destroyed ship.” Doctor Paski said as he came up to Doctor Nagota in a hurry.


“How critical?” Doctor Nagota answered.


“We’ve almost lost one, heavy trauma to the chest. We have him in stasis. The rest are fine for now.” Doctor Paski replied urgently.


“I’ll operate right now. Let’s get him on the table.”


He watched as several ragged crew members entered, one of them on a stretcher. They carried the fallen crew member onto the operating table in the next room and quickly left. Doctor Nagota brought the entirety of his medical tools online and began removing the crew member’s armor with an array of six robotic arms he controlled. One of the arms injected the crew member with the serum used to bring people out of stasis. This would restart the body’s vital functions and allow him to operate on the crewmember, but also give Doctor Nagota only a few precious seconds to save the patient. He set to work instantly.


***
Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, 
Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2, in Medship One
9 days to Disintegration


Captain Moore kept Captain Fresca’s arm over his shoulder, supporting her as he slowly guided her to a hospital bed. He gently laid her down, but she still winced when her leg came down. It was utterly fractured and a complete mess. She had scarcely noticed when she was escaping her ship, all the adrenaline and zero gravity were blocking the pain heavily. Now with most of her crew dead and nothing else to think about, the pain returned. But at least she wasn’t alone.


“You didn’t have to bring me in here.” Captain Fresca said.


Captain Moore sat down beside her and said, “I know, but I wanted to. Everything got out of control —” 


“Don’t.” Captain Fresca said, “just don’t talk about it yet.”


“Right. How’s the leg?” Captain Moore said.


“It’s fine. Reminds me I’m alive.” Captain Fresca responded. “I’m worried about Sergeant Aldrix. They just took him into surgery.”


“I’m sure he’ll be fine.” Captain Moore said reassuringly.


“Wilfred! He had a hole punched right through his chest!” she exclaimed.


“I know. It looked grizzly but Doctor Nagota is the best in the entirety of the ISI.” Captain Moore reassured once more.


Captain Moore’s communicator suddenly activated. “Captain, we just got a message from a probe. Apparently Noesteea has been attacked.”


“What is it?” Captain Fresca asked, noting the sudden concern of Captain Moore.


Captain Moore sat up and looked at her concerned, “Noesteea’s been attacked. I… I need to get back to my ship.”


***


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
In Transit Alpha Prime
9 days to Disintegration


“How the hell did that message transmit to every ship in the fleet?” Admiral Xin asked her comm officer furiously. Her XO, Lieutenant Griffon stood behind her, just as furious.


“I didn’t send it to anyone! The probe automatically transmitted to every ship in the fleet.” the comm officer replied defensively.


“Who’s genius idea was that!” Admiral Xin said. Now half her fleet was trying to communicate with her asking what was going on. This was not what they needed. 


“Was the message even encrypted?” Admiral Xin asked.


“Yes! But not command level encryption. Standard fleet level.” the comm officer answered.


“Griffon!” Admiral Xin called, “I need you to find out exactly how many ships have Noesteean crews. Now!”


“Yes sir! Griffon saluted and ran to a data terminal for the records.”


“Damn it!” Admiral Xin shouted to herself.


***


Terraline Nodees
Engine Technician - Helping Hand
1st Fleet, Rear Group Repair
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2
9 days to Disintegration


Terraline listened to all the worried voices, trying to keep her breathing steady.


“How bad is it?” Rodney, Terraline’s assistant, asked.


“Bad. The transmission said they’re all over the planet.” someone said.


“Oh no. No no no.” Someone was whispering behind them.


The crew of the helping hand was clustered in the common room. The only place in the ship not designed with utility in mind. Every ship in the fleet had heard the news by now, and the information was trickling down very quickly. The crew had stopped their duties of repairing the damaged destroyer and were now trying to find solace in one another.


“Can we go back?”


“Will the admiral make us go back?”


“No, she said we will continue on.”


“But we should go back?”


The hushed voices continued. Terraline struggled herself not to worry about all those she loved back on Noesteea. To think the inhuman Alpha bastards were on Noesteea itself? Killing their loved ones? It was instantly infuriating and terrifying.


“We should go back.” Terraline suddenly said, above the whispers.


She continued as soon as she realized all eyes were on her. “We should go back, and protect those we love personally. We are doing nothing for them here. Every second we wait, someone you love might be dead.”


“But what would we even do?” someone asked.


“We fight them! And if we can’t fight them, we take our kin and we evacuate them in this ship! I will not stand by while our families are slaughtered! I can’t!”


Murmurs of agreement came from the crew. Terraline was certain no one felt any different from her. How could they possibly stay here, light years away, and pretend everything was fine? They needed to act. They needed to go back and defend their families. Everyone understood that, everyone but one person of course.


“What the hell is this commotion about?” Captain Dauss said, entering the common room slowly.


No one answered.


“Are you all sad because of the news? Comforting each other perhaps?”


Still, no one replied. The crew simply watched, the anger in their faces becoming apparent.


“This is war! People die! If you don’t do your duties here and now, we will never finish off the Alpha Empire. And your entire planet is going to be sacked all because of your incompetence.”


Still no one budged.


“Are you mentally ill? Are you begging a court martial? Get back to your damn jobs! Stop being spineless wastes and do something good in your life for once. Forget about Noesteea. This matters more!” Captain Dauss yelled.


Terraline stood and in one swift motion dove straight at Captain Dauss, noting the surprise in her eyes. Both of them fell and Terraline managed to get on top of Captain Dauss, pinning her arms with her knees.


“This ends now.” Terraline said.


“I knew it would always be you.” Captain Dauss spat and proceeded to smash her head against Terraline’s, knocking Terraline off and freeing herself. Terraline kept stumbling back. Dauss advanced quickly onto her and slammed her fist into Terraline’s face using the momentum of her entire body. The crew, all standing now, caught Terraline before she hit the ground. She withdrew Captain Dauss’s pistol from her jumpsuit and aimed straight at Captain Dauss with one hand, the other caressed her bloodied face.


Captain Dauss stood back, snarling almost. “So this is how it will be?”


“Yes.” Terraline said.


“You don’t have what it takes coward.” Captain Dauss said vehemently.
Terraline looked Captain Dauss right in her eye and said, “Go to hell you miserable bitch.” She squeezed the trigger and half of Captain Dauss’s head exploded, her lifeless body crumpling on the ground.


Terraline tossed the gun on the ground and tried to compose hereself. She looked at her fellow crew around her, all completely shocked.


“It had to be done.” Terraline whimpered. “It had to be.”


They all silently nodded.


“Let’s go home.” she said.


Wordlessly the rest of the crew slowly went to their stations and prepared to leave the system.


***


Fredrick Steele
Commodore - Battleship Righteous Vengeance
2nd Fleet, Command Echelon
In orbit around the remnants of Alpha 2
9 days to Disintegration


“Commodore! There’s a ship leaving the fleet!”


Commodore Steele turned from a conversation with his XO to the sound of the tactical officer.


“I want that ship on screen now!” Steele yelled.


The display instantly brought the fleeing ship to focus. It was accelerating quickly away from the remnants of Alpha 2 and approaching the closest position it could possibly phase from.


“It’s leaving the system.” Commodore Steele’s XO said in disbelief.


“What ship is that?” Steele ordered, his voice filled with rage.


“Helping Hand, repair freighter class three sir!” his tac officer responded.


Commodore Steele zoomed out the display and sighted on the nearest ship. “Have Destroyer Group two intercept that vessel immediately! Get me Admiral Xin.”


Moments later, Admiral Xin’s face appeared on screen.


“We have a runner.” Commodore Steele said.


“Commodore, listen to me carefully, if that ship does not stand down, I want you to destroy it. Do not let it escape.” Admiral Xin ordered emotionlessly.


“Yes sir. I understand.” Commodore Steele said, he turned to his communication officer, “relay those orders lieutenant!”


***
Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, 
Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2
9 days to Disintegration


Captain Moore sat on the bridge of his ship, contemplating how it was possible an ISI core planet could have been attacked. It should have been impossible. All intelligence said the Alpha Empire’s fleet was pulled back to Alpha Prime. He worried briefly about his home planet of Gleron. If Noesteea could get hit, no doubt Gleron was vulnerable as well. He had already spoken with the other captains of Destroyer Squadron Two (aside from Captain Fresca) in an effort to calm their nerves and reassure them about the success of this campaign. Now was not the time to harbor any sort of fear or worries. The unexpected voice of his comm officer pulled him out of his thoughts. 


“Captain, direct orders from Commodore Steele, you are to intercept a retreating ship.”


Captain Moore shot up in his seat and instantly began a transmission to everyone on his ship, “all crew battle stations! Battle stations!”


He activated a display, wondering how an Alpha ship could have survived both the fight and the subsequent destruction of Alpha 2. As soon as the display zoomed in on the position of second fleet however, the blood drained from his face. The fleeing ship was one of their own.


“Engines to 200%, I want an interception course 16 degrees, quadrant three. I want missiles ready and railguns warmed up.”


        “Sir, what is the target?” came the confused voice of his gunnery chief.


        “Repair ship, ‘Helping Hand’. Do NOT fire.” Captain Moore stressed. “Comms, get me Captain Wolfe.”
        “Wolfe here.” came Captain Wolfe’s voice a second later.


        “Captain Wolfe, form up the Undying Scorn alongside the Shearing Talon, max speed. Get your weapons ready.”


Captain Moore watched as the Undying Scorn followed the Shearing Talon close behind.


“What is the target, I’m getting nothing on my sensors… wait. Are we engaging the repair ship?” Captain Wolfe said incredulously.


“We are on intercept course, we should overtake it around five hundred thousand kilometers from the nearest phase zone. Weapons are just in case, don’t fire without my order.” Captain Moore stated.


“This is insanity. That’s our own ship. Damn it!” Captain Wolfe shouted.


The Undying Scorn and Shearing Talon closed to less than fifty thousand kilometers, the two destroyers were much faster than the Helping Hand. Captain Moore stared at the display showing the distance closing. His leg was nervously vibrating and beads of sweat started rolling down his face.


“Comms hail that ship. Maximum priority. All crew, prepare for immediate ship depressurization.”


Captain Moore had kept the transmission online with Captain Wolfe who overheard the order.


“You can’t be serious! It’s a repair vessel! It has no offensive capabilities!” Captain Wolfe said.


“I’m not taking another chance like before. We lost a destroyer today because of overconfidence. I’m not losing another one.” Captain Moore said determinedly.


“Captain! I’m not getting through.” the Comm officer said.


“Keep trying.” Captain Moore said.


“Oh man. Fuck this day.” Captain Wolfe said.


“Depressurize the ship.” Captain Moore yelled.


The air quickly gave way to vacuum and gravity suddenly came offline.


“Depressurize the ship.” Captain Wolfe ordered uncertainly.


“Captain Moore! They’ve accepted the transmission, patching you through now.” the comm officer yelled.


Captain Moore turned to face a crew member of the Helping Hand.


“Helping Hand. Put your Captain online immediately.” Captain Moore said.


“I am the captain. Captain Terraline.” the woman said defiantly.


Captain Moore barely contained his dismay.


“Stop immediately and prepare for boarding or we will use lethal force.” Captain Moore said coldly.


“Our people need us. We will not stop for anyone.” Terraline replied.


“Stop the ship. Or I will kill you.” Captain Moore said. He could hear the worried voices whispering behind her.


“No. You won’t. We are civilians.” Terraline said and cut the transmission.


“Captain we are in range now!” Captain Moore’s XO said.


Suddenly Admiral Xin herself appeared on his display. “Admiral!” Captain Moore saluted. “The Helping Hand refuses to stop.”


“Destroy it.” Admiral Xin said.


“Destroy? Are you sure—” Captain Moore said, his facial expression breaking and showing his concern. 


“Destroy the ship!” Admiral Xin cut him off with a tone that could freeze stars.


        “Yes sir.” Captain Moore said.


        “Launch missiles one through four!” he ordered.


        Four missiles came from the Shearing Talon and another four shortly thereafter from the Undying Scorn.


        Captain Moore watched in horror as the missiles closed in on the defenseless ship and detonated. All four missiles detonated and annihilated the ship. Their explosions consumed it entirely as the second wave of missiles struck as well and rendered the Helping Hand into nothing more than a hot flurry of radioactive particles.


        “Never question my orders again.” Admiral Xin said before her transmission cut out.


        “That was fucked up.” Captain Wolfe said before ending his transmission.


        The navigator, comm officer and his XO all looked at Captain Moore. “It’s done.” he said, “Take the ship back to the fleet.” He promptly left the bridge and entered his private quarters.


***
Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
In transit Alpha Prime
8 days to Disintegration


“Admiral Xin, I have a transmission from Admiral Velen.”


Admiral Xin went to her quarters and activated the transmission. Admiral Velen’s face appeared in front of her.


“Yes?” Admiral Xin said expectedly.


“I wish to speak about the events that transpired yesterday.” Admiral Velen said.


        Admiral Xin’s neutral expression morphed into visible irritation. “I’d rather not speak about that yet.”


        “I understand the emotional intensity regarding the subject,” Admiral Velen began as tactful as possible, “however I wanted to broach the subject of new communication protocols to ensure that we do not repeat the situation.”


        “What do you have in mind?” Admiral Xin said.


        “Future probes should only use command level frequencies. We will thereafter decide what to pass on to the rest of the fleet.” Admiral Velen said.


        Admiral Xin paused. It ate at her what happened yesterday, an entire civilian crew killed by her orders. But she had no other choice and would do the same again if necessary. A breakdown of command was fatal, especially in the Alpha System.
        But Velen’s suggestion was to hold back all information, not only the strategic, mission critical information restricted to command frequencies but also any information regarding their home planets. If any further bad news arrived from the ISI core planets, she would be able to pass it on according to her discretion. Perhaps this would prevent a further sag in morale but the thought of purposefully holding back important information about her fleet’s home worlds was a dubious prospect at best and downright tyrannical at worst. The very thought screamed against the core tenets of freedom held by the ISI. So many ideals had been sacrificed for the sake of winning against the Alpha Empire, she feared the ISI would never be able to revert to the principles that had originally made it great. But again, she would do everything in her power to prevent another one of her ships from fleeing. Her decision to open fire on the Helping Hand weighed on her heavily. She had yet to sleep or eat since giving the command.


        “Do you really think this is the best course of action in regards to the crew of our fleets?” Admiral Xin asked.


        “You ask how I feel about withholding information?” Admiral Velen questioned.


        “Yes. The people of this fleet. Keeping information from them about their families, homes and everything that they care about.”


        “I find the option morally questionable... yes. But I do not think that warrants my emotions coming into question. Strategically it is the best option for this fleet. I am fairly certain of this plan’s potential and that is all that matters. I’ll worry about how the crew feel after we finish our campaign here and the ISI worlds are safe.” Admiral Velen stated. “I would expect you to support this more than anyone else.”


        “What is that supposed to mean?” Admiral Velen shot back.


        “You opened fire on one of our own ships to put the others back in line. Why would you care now about the feelings of the crew?” Admiral Velen said boldly.


        Admiral Xin’s eyes widened and her face contorted into one of anger, “I had no other choice! The ship was nearing its phase jump point and would not stop. Deserters are punished by execution.
”Do you really think that every option I consider, every decision I make and every thought in my mind doesn’t take into account what I had to do? Those people... our people are dead by my hands. Don’t think for one second that I have any other goals than to get this fleet through this campaign intact. The only reason I ponder about how it makes the crew feel is because I don’t want a damn mutiny on my hands! What? Do you think after yesterday the rest of the fleet loves me now? We need to instill discipline in this fleet, especially the civilian components. If they resent me, so be it. I’ll live with it as long as they don’t desert the fleet. But I am not giving them any reasons to distrust me or my judgement unless it is truly worth it. That is what I am considering. Not fucking feelings.” Admiral Xin said.
Admiral Velen stood motionlessly for a few moments before responding. “Have you made your decision sir?”


“Yes, we’ll put a fleet-wide encryption lock on messages from probes. Dismissed.”


The projection of Admiral Velen disappeared and Admiral Xin sat down in a chair, taking a deep breath. The situation might have been bad, but the campaign would not be over until Alpha Prime was nothing but a withering carcass and the Alpha Empire was erased from history. Until then, she would find a way to achieve those goals, one way or another.


She opened a transmission to Commodore Steele, whose fleet was making final preparations to depart from Alpha 2’s location.
        
        “Admiral Xin, sir.” the Commodore saluted.


        “I see that you have the majority of the civilian rear fleet.” Admiral Xin said.


        “Affirmative admiral.” Commodore Steele replied.


        “I want you to place a detachment of marines aboard those ships.” Admiral Xin ordered.


        “It will be done Admiral. I was considering the option myself.” Commodore Steele said.


        “And keep an eye on Second Fleet, we can’t afford another situation like yesterday.” Admiral Xin told him.


        “Of course Admiral, the Brykean fleet will not let you down.” Commodore Steele said with pride.


        “Excellent, Admiral Xin out.”


        Commodore Steele’s determination impressed her. In this critical time he stood by her without hesitation and as much as it scared her to admit, it really helped. Second Fleet did after all come almost entirely from the world of Bryke. It’s armed forces were known for their resolve and martial power. If anyone could get through this campaign intact it would be Second Fleet.
        Her heart continued to beat at an accelerated rate, and her face was flushed after yelling at Admiral Velen. It was entirely unprofessional of her and she wished that she could have better controlled her counter to his accusation. But her normally sternly controlled emotions were much harder to control after ordering the death of Helping Hand. She vowed to keep them under better control in the future, lest they start impeding her ability to lead the ISI.
        Admiral Velen was normally a superior tactical planner and had rightfully earned the position of second in command of the fleet. Should anything happen to Admiral Xin, he would immediately gain command. Yet it worried her that he only commanded Fifth fleet at the moment. The entirety of the fleet consisted of his very powerful dreadnaught and eight other ships. She pondered briefly if this was why he was seemingly unable to grasp the situation. With such a small fleet, perhaps morale had never been brought into question.
Yet how could this be true. Simply because the size of Fifth Fleet was smaller than others it was still a fleet. Commanding the Dreadnaught Argus itself was a massive challenge because of the enormity of manpower on it alone. The dreadnaught housed at minimum a crew of five thousand, fully staffed almost twenty thousand. It was a challenge to command that single ship no matter the caliber of the Admiral.
So it wasn’t Admiral Valen she was worried about. It was the morale of the crew in general. Across all four fleets. She realized now that as powerful as a force these fleets were, they had thus far only been clearing barrier worlds. Those battles were never in doubt and had led the ISI to assume a feeling of superiority. All those victories may have made her fleet a little too confident up until the face of a serious enemy. She was certain that the upcoming battles would be difficult and bloody. She feared her battle group might be disheartened even further by the lack of easy victories. 
Admiral Xin suddenly shook her head and refocused on the task at hand. Formless thoughts were a detriment to her ability to lead and would only feed fears that would prove fatal if given credence. She contacted her comm officer.


“Admiral Xin, sir,” the officer saluted.


“Notify the rest of the battle group that I’ll be making a transmission in ten minutes.”


It was time for Admiral Xin to set things straight with every ISI soul in the system.


***


Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, 
Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
In orbit around remnants of Alpha 2
7 days to Disintegration


        Captain Moore sat on the bridge, absently gazing at the rest of the crew manning their stations. It was pure Hell for him. Personally destroying the Helping Hand was enough to fill his heart with misery, but even worse was waiting. Second fleet was being tended to by the civilian rear ships. Refueled, repaired and resupplied. Most of the ships had survived the battle of Alpha 2 just fine, but a few had been badly bruised and needed serious repairs. Among these damaged ships was the ship that the Helping Hand had been working on. In its sudden departure, the Helping Hand had inadvertently sheared off the supports off the destroyer it was repairing during its detachment. This meant many more hours of literally floating in space doing nothing as the ship was being reinforced.


        Captain Moore had nothing but respect for the Brykean’s and their fleet, and the occasional transmission to nearby ships of Second Fleet was pleasant enough. However, the civilian ships were not Brykean, they all came from the rear group of First Fleet. Their crews hailed from an assortment of planets, some not even core ISI worlds. So, the sudden appearance of not just ISI marines, but Brykean marines on their civilian vessels caused more than one instigation. The ensuing arguments were being held on open channels because of the stupidity of the civilian captains. Essentially, comms was literally filled with civilian captains shouting at marines. Unfortunately, Captain Moore could not simply stop listening in the event that important tactical information was actually broadcast. Thus, this was his own Hell.


        As he sat there, facepalming with an expression that looked as tortured he felt, a transmission came from Commodore Bryke himself.


“Commodore Bryke, sir!” Captain Moore said, sitting up and saluting.


“At ease Captain Moore.” Commodore Bryke said.


“What do I owe this pleasure to?” Captain Moore asked, not attempting to hide his surprise.


“You are the Captain responsible for the destruction of the Helping Hand. Correct?” Commodore Steele said, his voice grim.


“Affirmative Commodore.” Captain Moore replied, unsure what the Commodore was leading to.


After a brief pause, the Commodore’s harsh expression relaxed a bit. “I wanted to thank you Captain Moore.” he said.


“You, uh you’re welcome Commodore.” Captain Moore replied.


“I sincerely mean it. You did something not many have the strength to do. I know you may be holding yourself personally accountable for the deaths of that crew, but they made their decision. Whatever happened on that ship, they were dead the moment they broke from the fleet. The decision wasn’t yours so do not hold yourself accountable for it.” Commodore Steele said.


“Understood Commodore.” Captain Moore said.


“How do you feel about our present situation?” Commodore Steele said.


“How do I… feel? It’s alright I guess?” Captain Moore stuttered.


“Really, how do you feel. Speak freely.” Commodore Steele pressed him.


“I hate it.” Captain Moore said finally. “I’ve got nothing but time to think and to listen to these civilians being utter arseholes on open channels. It’s terrible.” Captain Moore said.


“I thought as much, You’ll be happy to know I’m sending you back to First Fleet then with Admiral Xin. First and Second Destroyer Squadrons are due to leave immediately.”


“That sounds, good. Commodore. I’ll notify my Squadron right away.” Captain Moore said.


“Excellent, now take care of yourself. We might need your resolve more than once by the time this is over.” Commodore Steele said in his previous grim tone.


Captain Moore leaned back in confusion as Commodore Steele ended the transmission.


***
Ezelia Douglas
Commodore - Supercarrier Oslia
3rd Fleet, Command Echelon
Approaching Alpha 3
5 Days until Disintegration


        Commodore Douglas stood alone in the tactical operations room of her ship: The Oslia. She was constantly rearranging the holographic positions of her forces, attempting to run simulations to determine the best attack strategy on Alpha 3. The planet was much more heavily defended than Alpha 2, and additional Alpha forces were in position halfway between Alpha Prime and Alpha 3, ready to reinforce either position if necessary.
        She enjoyed this moment to herself, away from her constantly reliant crew and the constant deliberations of the other fleet commanders. The campaign was proceeding nicely, and she had to ensure she did her part to keep things that way. The attack on Alpha 3 had to go well in order for the rest of Admiral Xin’s strategy to work.
        Not to say that Commodore Douglas agreed with Commodore Xin. Rather than separating 1st, 2nd and 3rd fleet, Commodore Douglas would have either used their combined force to clear each planet or attack all three enemy planets simultaneously. Attacking piecemeal like this seemed like a waste of their numerical superiority. Even though Commodore Douglas’s 3rd fleet with Admiral Valen’s 5th fleet was more than enough to take Alpha 3, she wanted to make sure that casualties were limited.
        She knew Commodore Bryke felt the same way. Her fleet was as much Oslian as his was Brykean, making every casualty report that much more painful to read. But she had been part of this war for close to a decade, replacing her predecessor because he could not handle the pressure of command. As all good commanders understood, she too knew that casualties were unavoidable.


        She turned her attention back to the plotting of ISI battlegroups around her. She then switched the tactical display to show the actual positions of all ships and carefully analyzed their various positions. Commodore Steele’s forces were the furthest away, just now preparing to leave what was left of Alpha 2. Admiral Xin’s own 1st fleet was in a threatening position in relation to Alpha Prime, but still far enough away to maneuver strategically. Commodore Douglas’s fleet was near Alpha 3, readying itself for an impending attack alongside Admiral Velen’s much smaller 5th fleet.
        The Alpha Empire only had three separate battle groups left. One around Alpha Prime, one around Alpha 3 and one halfway between the two. It was the fleet between the two planets that made her uneasy. Whatever its commander decided to do would surely play a massive part in the upcoming battle. Admiral Xin’s time table mandated an attack at the very latest twenty hours from now.
        Commodore Douglas gestured to rotate the holographic display but paused when it began moving erratically. She thought for a moment the console was broken. But she looked at her own hand saw it undeniably shaking. Shocked, she withdrew her hand quickly and cradled with the other, concern growing within her. Part of her was concerned over her homeworld of Oslia. She knew everyone in the fleet with a heart was. After hearing of the mysterious assault on Noesteea, it was only human nature to wonder what if it had been their world that was hit.
        
She was no stranger to stressful environments. But every hour that passed brought her closer to the most important military engagement of her entire career, an even greater concern. She could feel the anxiety slowly building within her, despite her every attempt to prevent it. She used her long instilled military discipline to calm herself until her hands stopped shaking. The anxiety was still there, but she would prevent it from interfering. She was no stranger to stressful environments.


***
Darak Villman
Communication Specialist - The Big One
1st Fleet, Rear Group Refuel
Approaching Alpha Prime
5 days to Disintegration


“Is the gold one still around?” Darak asked his captain; Captain Nass.


“No you’re clear, Sam is keeping a lookout.” Captain Nass said. “Anything?”


“Patching in now sir.” Darak said.


Darak felt a bead of sweat rolling down his face. He trusted Captain Nass and Samantha, but the ISI marines made him unbelievably nervous. After they opened fire on the helping hand, he dared not imagine what they would do to him if they found out what he was doing.
After a brief moment of interfacing, Darak got the communication’s array to read him back all command level encrypted information transmitted within the past 24 hours. When the probe had come with news of Noesteea, temporary lockout programming was put into effect across the fleet to ensure that no one else would be demoralized. Tampering with it was borderline treason alone. The ISI marines were an added precaution to make sure all civilian vessels complied. Darak had no illusions about the consequences for his actions.
The Big One was the largest refuel ship in the fleet and therefore of particular importance. This, coupled with the fact that the majority of the crew was Noesteean warranted an entire squad of ISI marines roaming its corridors. The crew had already discreetly decided with the captain that they would continue monitoring for updates regarding Noesteea. Now it was just a matter of finding a moment where an ISI marine wasn’t around to find out.
Problem was, gathering the 24 hour log of encrypted data took a few moments and additionally, the log could not be copied without military forces being notified. This forced Darak to parse through the logs as fast as he could to see if there was anything pertaining to Noesteea. He felt Captain Nass’s hand on his shoulder, urging him on.


“Alright! I’m in. I’m looking through it now.” Darak said.


Captain Nass listened wordlessly. Darak knew he was just as terrified of finding out more information as Darak was. But, they had to know. Even at the risk of a court martial. Darak continued to read through the logs as fast as he possibly could.


“Who wants dinner?” Sam’s voiced cried out from down the hall.


Shit. That was the code signal that a marine was coming. Probably the one with a golden insignia that kept following him. Darak tried to read even faster, but he had just passed the halfway mark. He was tempted to use a search function to find anything to do with Noesteea, but that would be instantly flagged by the communication software.


“Keep reading. I’ll stall him.” Captain Nass said quietly.


Darak listened as Captain Nass stepped outside the small console room. “Hey golden, have we gotten any new orders from Admiral Xin yet?”


“No.” the marine responded instantly.


“I had some tactical ideas. Maybe you could relay them to her?” Captain Nass said.


The deep, heavyset footsteps of the fully armored marine drew closer. Darak began panicking. He stopped reading through the log and disconnected from it as quickly as he could. Right as the console shut down the door slid open and Darak turned to see the golden marine dwarfing the rest of the room.


“What are you doing?” the marine said emotionlessly.


“I… thought I accidently muted our communication array but it’s all good sir!” Darak said with a forced smile.


The marine turned wordlessly and left. Darak waited until he heard the heavy footfalls disappear before he let out a huge sigh of relief. This subterfuge stuff was not his type of thing. Captain Nass walked in and at least a dozen other crew members clustered expectantly behind him.


“Nothing.” Darak said.


The crewmembers sighed and left. Darak wasn’t sure if those were sighs of relief or disappointed sighs of people seeking information. Darak was not even sure how he himself was feeling. The lack of news could be good because there were no further developments or bad, very bad actually. His fears about his home world only grew exponentially. He slowly started to understand why Admiral Xin wanted to keep reports private. But he knew as logical as it was, he couldn’t just ignore what was going on back home.


***
 
Jeremiah Velen
Admiral - Dreadnaught Argus
5th Fleet, Command Echelon
In attack position, Alpha 3
5 days to disintegration


Admiral Velen sat back in his chair, soaking in the harmonious sounds of a symphony playing alongside his speakers in the very dimly lit tactical operations room. He had the music specifically tailored to combine with the distant hum of the ship’s several reactors to bolster it and make the sounds even more soothing to his very distinct taste. 
Of course, soothing was but an opinion. For Admiral Velen, soothing meant a thunderous choir growing in strength and instantly fading to a single instrument lightly strumming in a tumultuous cycle that he alone found soothing. The music relaxed him, energized him and kept the rest of the crew out of the tactical operations room unless absolutely necessary. It was perhaps his greatest idea.
He grinned to himself at this thought. He surprised himself with this reaction, for he had not grinned since the entirety of the ISI armada had entered the Alpha System. His discontent only grew the closer they approached Alpha Prime. Admiral Xin was an utter pain to work with and made atrocious strategic decisions for unfathomably stupid reasons. From entering the system as one giant group to splitting up their forces afterwards, the woman was just begging for something to go wrong. He had previously pondered for brief moments if she was actually and Alpha spy and purposefully trying to misdirect the fleet with just enough skill that only the most suspicious would notice.
And Admiral Velen was suspicious indeed. It was his distrustful nature to inquire about those around him. After all, many years ago before even joining the ISI fleet, he had been an officer charged with finding Alpha spies. He never forgot that training and never forgot to apply it to everyone he had ever met.
That’s not to say that his suspicions were the reason for him to ascend so high up the ISI command chain. He was, after all, a genius in many respects and always ensured those around him were well aware. He was aware of his own flaws however, chief among them being the ability to lead. People tended to stray away from commanders who questioned their every move and doubted their every motive. If they were half as intelligent as he, they would quickly understand the utility in having such a thorough commander.
It was for this reason that he never became the grand admiral of the ISI fleets, instead watching the position go to Minhua Xin. It was no doubt the greatest insult he ever received, but he watched off to the side, never hindering Admiral Xin out of spite. For he was a loyal member of the ISI, and he would not purposefully ever hinder her, no matter how incapable she proved. After all, his loyalty was rewarded with the command of the newly created 5th fleet with the Dreadnaught Argus as the flagship. He was also, officially, and unofficially, the second in command of the entirety of the ISI military. Should anything happen to Admiral Xin, that responsibility would rest firmly on his shoulders.
Admiral Velen spun in his chair, soaking up the sounds that reverberated around him and enjoying the beauty of the ship. The Argus was the only ship of her class, easily three times as large as the next largest ship: the battleship. The fact that he commanded it was no minor accomplishment, it was a great honor worthy of a great man. But he did not control the rest of the fleets... yet. That was Grand Admiral Xin. And the way she currently led them may lead them to ruin yet. And even though Admiral Velen would never purposefully hinder Admiral Xin, he would not let her idiotic decisions put the fleet in danger.


        “Admiral, the war council is waiting.” the communications officer notified him.


        “Patch it through to the tac room.’” Admiral Velen said with a scowl.


        Instantly the music turned off, replaced by Commodore Douglas’s annoying tone.


        “Admiral Velen.” she saluted.


        The previously dark tactical room began to glow as a three dimensional representation of their fleets and Alpha 3 appeared all around him. Admiral Velen looked around, noting the representations of their ships, suppressing a smug smile when he saw the size of his Dreadnaught compared to the rest of 5th and 3rd fleets. His smile disappeared when he saw the holographic representations of Admiral Xin, as well as Commodores Douglas and Steele. 


“Admiral Velen, have you finalized your attack plans with Commodore Douglas?” Admiral Xin asked.


“Finalized? Yes.”


“Then would you mind going over them?”


Velen paused for a moment, unsure of how to read Admiral Xin’s tone. The two Commodores looked at him, waiting patiently. There was no reason to keep them waiting.


“Commodore Douglas and I have agreed on a two line staggered formation. Carrier class ships will form the second battle line, supplementing the first battle line which will be composed of the Dreadnaught Argus, the rest of 5th fleet and elements of 3rd fleet. At extreme range of the Alpha Empire forces, the second battle line will position themselves first.”


“You wish to attack with your carriers in the front?” Admiral Xin questioned. “Commodore Douglas, do you agree to this?”


“Yes Admiral,” Commodore Douglas said, Admiral Velen noted the slight hesitation. “The plan is to use my carriers in an attempt to lure out the Alpha forces as far away from Alpha 3 as possible.”


Admiral Velen continued, “Alpha 3 is a volcanic planet, with large amounts of heavy metals in the air. This means we are unable to get any readings from the surface. Should we get too close to the planet… we will be attacking it blind. The success of this assault hinges on two factors. The willingness of the Alpha Empire to leave the safety of their planet, and, more importantly, Admiral Xin’s ability to prevent Alpha reinforcements.” Admiral Velen said, turning expressionlessly to Admiral Xin. 


“The enemy fleet between Alpha Prime and Alpha 3 will be surrounded entirely and defeated. Only after they are completely incapable of reinforcing Alpha 3 will I give the signal for the attack.”


Admiral Velen eyed the representation of that Alpha fleet. Halfway between Alpha 3 and Alpha Prime. He had fought the Alpha Empire for long enough to know that this was no misplaced tactical error or anomaly in tactics. The Alpha Empire would do anything to win. Even sacrificing an entire fleet was not above them. But this did not help answer the question of why they were there in the first place. He already had doubts about Admiral Xin’s incompetence, it did not make him feel easier that she would be personally attacking that fleet.


        After all, it was easily composed of more than seventy warships, a truly dangerous amount if utilized correctly. He could not believe it, but he hoped that his estimations of Admiral Xin’s abilities were wrong and she truly was capable. 


        “Any more questions before we begin?” Admiral Xin asked.


        She looked around at each of her subordinates, trusting each to do their duty.  
        
        “Excellent, I will begin my attack soon. Be ready.”


***


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
In attack position
5 days to Disintegration


        “Commander all ships accounted for. We wait only your signal.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “Message the other fleets, we are beginning the attack.” Admiral Xin ordered, “all ships full power to engines, open fire on my mark.”


        The entirety of 1st fleet began accelerating. Destroyer groups lined up in intimidating vees. Cruisers thrummed forward, carefully aligning their weapons on the distant enemy ships while frigates flanked them, prepared to deal with closer targets. Carriers stayed to the rear, their squadrons already deployed and streaking forward in formation. At the heart of all these ships was Admiral Xin’s Battleship: Gleron’s Maul. Together, they formed a massive cluster with more firepower than the Alpha Fleet in front of them could ever hope to match.


        Minutes passed, and the Alpha Fleet turned into attack position but did not give up its ground to the rapidly encroaching ISI Fleet. Admiral Xin watched carefully, soon they would be in range. But she wanted to wait until they were a little closer, so that they could instantly kill the enemy fleet. As soon as she engaged the enemy forces, Admiral Velen and Commodore Douglas would begin the attack on Alpha 3, bringing this campaign that much closer to an end.


        “We’re in range now.” Lieutenant Griffon said, “standby… they are opening fire.”


        The enemy cruisers fired a barrage of railgun rods at her fleet. Three cruisers took direct hits but kept in line with the rest of the fleet, their armor shrugging off most of the damage. The enemy fleet then proceeded to fire their own missiles, which would take a few minutes to hit.


        “Hold fire.” Admiral Xin commanded, “prepare to target enemy destroyers with railguns and cruisers with missiles. 3rd Fleet, 5th Fleet begin the assault!”


“Copy Admiral, forces moving in on Alpha 3 now.” 
        
        The ISI fleet drew nearer and nearer to the still Alpha fleet, which unleashed another torrent of deadly railgun rods. The rods streamed far faster than the eye could track, traveling 150 thousand kilometers in less than 10 seconds. The majority of the rods once again flew in between the ISI fleet, destined to travel through space for eternity. But several rounds managed to strike ISI ships. More cruisers took damage, but kept in formation. One destroyer took two direct hits across its bow and instantly began breaking up as the second round penetrated the majority of the ship. Several transmissions came on at the same time as worried Captains voiced their concerns. 


        “Hold your fire! Wait until we are within 120 thousand kilometers!” Admiral Xin ordered her fleet. The transmissions instantly stopped, and the fleet continued closing the distance to the Alpha Fleet which remained motionless this whole time.


        “Five, four, three, two, one, open fire! All ships open fire, open fire!” Admiral Xin yelled.


        The entirety of the ISI 1st Fleet simultaneously fired their own railguns at the Alpha fleet. Fighter squadrons instantly accelerated ahead of the rest of the fleet to close in on the Alpha Fleet. More than a thousand missiles were launched and began streaking towards the enemy. 


        The railgun rounds found a dozen victims. Admiral Xin watched as a dozen enemy destroyers transformed into beautiful blossoming explosions, shooting out flaming wreckage in all directions before the vacuum of space doused them.


        “Enemy missiles incoming.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        The volley of enemy missiles were finally closing in. ISI ships with missile locks cut speed and fell behind the rest of the fleet, maximizing the time to dispose of the enemy missiles.
        
        Antimissiles shot out intercepting a number of the incoming targets. Focused laser point defense rendered the rest of the incoming missiles inert.


        “All enemy missiles eliminated.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “Excellent, all ships, fire at will.” Admiral Xin said. Immediately, the rest of the ISI ships began launching missiles and firing their railguns at individual targets.


        Admiral Xin watched the tactical map closely, waiting for the ISI missiles to impact against the Alpha Empire’s ships.


        “Sir, they're not using countermeasures!” Lieutenant Griffon said in surprise.


        “Get confirmation on that!” Admiral Xin yelled.


        The enemy ships weren’t firing any antimissiles or defensive satellites. They didn’t even have any fighters deployed. Admiral Xin continued watching the tactical display, completely bewildered. The missiles were only seconds away from impacting now, yet the enemy ships still did nothing. They did not even move. Except, Admiral Xin looked on in horror as she noticed all the ships were turned perpendicular to the incoming missiles, an absolutely suicidal move. She waited eagerly for the explosions of the enemy ships, but when the missiles were about to impact, no explosions came.


        “Fire control! Sensors! What the hell just happened?” Admiral Xin demanded.


        “Point defense signatures negative.” Fire control responded, “missiles are still intact but past the enemy fleet.”


        “They evaded?” Admiral Xin asked, almost to herself.


        “No sir! Enemy ships are not there!” Sensors said.


        “Gone?” Admiral Xin said. “Gone where!”


        “Standby!” Sensors replied.


        “Enemy ships have all gone into phase.” Sensors said slowly with disbelief, turning to Admiral Xin.


        “They phased? They must have done a conscious phase… that shouldn’t be possible, comms, get me the other fleets online, now!”
        
        “Uh, sir, we just received an incoming transmission, its bouncing all over the fleet.” the comms officer said.


        “What is it?” Admiral Xin demanded.


        “Apparently, the ISI Core has been attacked.” the comm officer replied slowly.


        “Which system?” Admiral Xin asked.


        “All of them.” 


        ***
Ezelia Douglas
Commodore - Supercarrier Oslia
3rd Fleet, Command Echelon
In range Alpha 3
4 Days until Disintegration


        “They aren’t going for it.” Commodore Douglas said.


        “They will, just wait.” Admiral Velen responded. 


        “It’s a bad idea to risk my carriers like this,” Commodore Douglas finally said.


        “Watch your tone Commodore, do not forget I am in charge of this battle.” scoffed Admiral Velen.


        Commodore Douglas responded with silence. She despised Admiral Velen. Despised him for his lack of respect, for his willingness to put her fragile fleet of carriers in front of his own dreadnaught and for generally being the biggest son of a bitch she had ever met. But he did outrank her, no matter how much of an imbecile he was.


        A transmission suddenly came through, breaking her frustrating line of thought.


        “Admiral Xin is engaging enemy forces, begin your assault.” the transmission read.


        “So do you still want to sit here idly?” Commodore Douglas asked.


“Must you be so persistent?” Admiral Velen said, “we will approach the enemy forces slowly.”


“Second battle line, reposition behind the first line. All craft, accelerate at 50% towards Alpha 3.” Commodore Douglas ordered. 


“What do you think you are doing Commodore?” Admiral Velen said.


“Repositioning the carriers to the rear. Don’t tell me you think the Alpha Fleet will actually take the bait still.”


Admiral Velen said nothing.
“All ships keep current heading, prepare to engage enemy forces. Cobalt, Sapphire, Emerald, Jade Squadrons, screen the main force. Ruby, Aqua and Topaz Squadrons, stay back with the carriers, nothing gets through to them.” Commodore Douglas ordered.


The enemy fleet around Alpha 3 arrayed itself into attack formation, staying in low orbit around the planet. It was obvious they were content for the ISI fleet to begin the battle. Commodore Douglas was eager to oblige.


Suddenly Admiral Velen once again came online, “all ships, accelerate to attack speed. Fire at will.”


“You want to initiate a full frontal assault!” Commodore Douglas questioned. “It would be more prudent to stay with the original plan and strike with our starfighters —”


“I am altering the plan. I believe it is time the Alpha Empire witnessed the full firepower of this dreadnaught.” Admiral Velen smiled viciously.


“Don’t leave me carriers undefended, Commodore Douglas said.”


“Don’t fear Commodore, there won’t be anything left to defend from.” he said defiantly.


Commodore Douglas watched as the ship’s of the first battle line raced to close in with the enemy forces above the clouded Alpha 3, leaving her carriers much further behind and without their support. At least she had the common sense to retain several fighter squadrons around the carriers of the second line.


In the next few moments, the first battle line entered range of the Alpha Empire forces orbiting Alpha 3, and both sides began firing missiles at each other. They were fully engaged now, and neither side could withdraw without taking significant casualties.


“Second line, stay out of range and keep an eye out for enemy fighters passing the first battle line.” Commodore Douglas said firmly.


A transmission suddenly came on screen from Admiral Xin, “the Alpha Fleet just phased to your position!”


“What the hell?” Commodore Douglas said, scanning the surrounding space in a panic.


“Commodore! Enemy ships just appeared 50 thousand klicks from our position.” her sensors officer yelled out.


“They phased in…” Commodore Douglas whispered to herself. She physically shook her head and focused. She had planned for something like this, but she had never considered the possibility of the enemy tactically phasing. “Second battle line, all carriers, engines to 500%, accelerate to the first battle line’s position now! Enemy forces vectoring in!”


“Commodore Douglas, what are you doing? If you do not hold off the enemy battle group my forces will be completely surrounded. Stick to the plan Commodore.” Admiral Velen said with disgust.


“Defend against the reinforcement fleet with what! My carriers! They won’t stand a chance!” Commodore Douglas said, “all ships stay on present course.”


“You are disobeying a direct order!” Admiral Velen said as he seethed. “Treason!”


“Comms! Get me a transmission to Admiral Xin, now!” Commodore Douglas ordered. Everything was falling apart fast.


“Commodore Douglas, I am rerouting 2nd fleet to your position as quickly as possible. Commodore Steele?” Admiral Xin said.


“I can’t phase in like the Alpha forces just did, it’s too close to the enemy planet and we risk having the entirety of the 2nd fleet being destroyed right after we complete our phase jump. I’m sending our fastest ships at maximum speed to you ” Commodore Bryke said as reassuringly as he could.


“1st fleet is on route to your position as well. But you’ll have to —” Admiral Xin said as Admiral Velen joined the transmission.


“Minhua you incompetent idiot! How could you let the enemy fleet slip right under your nose!” Admiral Velen raged.


“How dare you speak against the Grand Admiral that way!” roared Commodore Steele. 


Admiral Xin raised a hand and Commodore Steele visibly straightened out and relaxed. “Admiral Velen, you have made a severe strategic error in your placement of Commodore Douglas’s 3rd fleet and your persistence in sacrificing her to keep yourself alive is unbecoming of a commander. I hereby relieve you of your command.”


Admiral Velen smashed his fist against the holo display on his ship. “Me? You relieve me of command after all of your failures in leading this campaign? You are out of your mind! Commodore Steele, Douglas, do you not see that she is poisoning this campaign and ensuring our failure!”


“Lieutenant Griffon, send and order to the Dreadnaught Argus to arrest Admiral Velen immediately.” Admiral Xin said cooly.
“Yes admiral.”


“You think my men will betray me like you have? They know that I am the only one who can salvage this campaign, Xin.”


“Burn in Hell Valen.” Admiral Xin said, cutting him out of the transmission.


“Commodore Douglas, you have full control of 3rd and 5th Fleets. Do whatever you can to survive until 1st and 2nd Fleets arrive.” Admiral Xin said.


“The Argus is refusing the order. Valen’s crew will not arrest him.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


“Damn that man.” Admiral Xin said. “Commodore Douglas, prepare a marine boarding party. Have them capture Valen and restore control of the Argus. Do not fire on any of the vessels in 5th Fleet unless they fire on you.”


“Yes sir.” Commodore Douglas said.


Admiral Velen had picked the absolute worst time for a mutiny. The first line was heavily engaged with the enemy Alpha Empire forces. The Argus was truly a leviathan of a ship, and used its three ultra-heavy railguns to dispatch enemy ships with a single shot. The rest of the battle line was just barely holding against the orbital Alpha forces, relying heavily on 3rd Fleet’s starfighter squadrons to keep enemy vessels back.


Commodore Douglas watched as her second battle line approached the first. The Alpha Reinforcement Fleet was close behind, just out of range. “All forces in 3rd and 5th Fleets, form a defensive circle around the carriers. All squadrons draw fire away from the Fleet. Admiral Velen has gone rogue, disregard all orders from him.” Commodore Douglas said.


To her surprise, all six ships in 5th Fleet, excluding the Dreadnaught Argus followed her orders, leaving the Dreadnaught vulnerable and moving into formation around the carriers.


“Comms, open a channel to the cruiser nearest the Argus.”


“Commodore Douglas, what can I do for you?” the ship’s Captain answered.


“Do you hold no loyalty to Admiral Velen?” Commodore Douglas asked with utmost seriousness.


“None. I’ve always hated the man.” she answered back.


“Do you have any marines on board?” Commodore Douglas asked.
“I do, you want them to board Admiral Velen’s ship.” the captain said.


“Yes. He would suspect any ship from my fleet.” Commodore Douglas sighed.


“I understand.” the Captain said, before she added on, “but be aware he suspects everyone.”


“Limit casualties if possible, we just need to take control of the ship back from Admiral Velen.” Commodore Douglas said.


“Understood, sending a gunship now.”


        Commodore Douglas braced herself on her seat as her entire ship begin shaking.


        “Commodore, the Alpha Reinforcement Fleet has joined the battle.”


        “By the sacred doctrines of the Initiative, I do hope we are victorious on this day.” Commodore Douglas muttered.


***
Zeke Relov
Lieutenant, 3rd Platoon Cruiser Impeccable
Boarding Transport Gunship
3 Days to Disintegration


“Platoon! Listen up, we are about to board the Dreadnaught and put Admiral Velen out of commission. Limit casualties if possible, but do not hesitate to use lethal rounds, time is of the essence here.”


“Sir, I think we’re boarding the wrong ship.” one of his sergeants said.


“Hilarious. Anyone else? No? Then put your game faces on.”


The four sergeants and Zeke strapped themselves into the gunship as it began lifting within the cruiser’s hangar bay. The rest of the gunship troop bay was filled with marine drones, freshly booted from their standby mode. No dedicated warship in the ISI arsenal carried a full complement of living, breathing soldiers as it would be a waste of crew space and resources. But an entire platoon of drones took relatively little space and took up no resources when offline. Now they were online, and awaiting command to take back command of the Dreadnaught Argus.


Lieutenant Relov watched as the gunship exit the cruiser’s hangar, using the video feed on the nose of the gunship. It had emerged in a tactical nightmare outside the cruiser. Missiles flew in each direction, ISI and Alpha alike, targeted by point defense lasers. Tungsten rods ejected from railguns shot through space and impacted with titanic forces. Multiple ships were already disintegrating from taking far too much damage. Zeke watched as an ISI Frigate in front of the gunship failed to finish off a pair of incoming missiles and they exploded right off its bow, momentarily blinding the camera. The frigate still held together as multiple railgun shots raked across its midsection and severed the ship in two. All around the gunship, fighters ruthlessly engaged each other, sending thousands of tracer rounds gleaming through space.


The gunship rotated heavily as a trio of enemy fighters came in pursuit. Zeke took a deep breath, “hold onto your helmets boys!” he yelled. The enemy fighters opened fire and the gunship made a tight turn, maneuvering right alongside the freshly destroyed ISI Frigate and flying right under its superstructure. An allied ISI fighter swooped suddenly from above the gunship and instantly destroyed two of the Alpha Fighters chasing the gunship. 


The gunship went through a series of evasive maneuvers, attempting to shake the last pursing fighter and the ever increasing pieces of wreckage spinning wildly in all directions. The enemy fighter opened fire once more and the gunship took several direct hits, shearing off a wing and taking out an engine, causing a trail of debris to form behind it. Just as Zeke thought the gunship would explode, the enemy fighter smashed against a piece of the sheared wing from the gunship, sending it spinning out of control into a piece of the ISI Frigate’s wreckage.


He took a deep breath and opened a comm channel to the Dreadnaught. “Argus, this is Lieutenant Relov requesting immediate permission to land. My ship was destroyed and my crew are seriously injured.”


Relov’s home ship, the cruiser from where they had launched from, was actually fine. But he assumed that the flight control technicians would not have been able to tag every single ship and its origins in the ensuing chaos of the fight.


“Permission granted. Approach hangar four.”


His instincts were right, and the gunship began an automatic docking procedure. Now this is where things got ugly.


***
Ezelia Douglas
Commodore - Supercarrier Oslia
3rd Fleet, Command Echelon
Approaching Alpha 3
3 Days until Disintegration






“The Gallace and Tugrid are breaking apart Commodore.”


“Cobalt and Ruby squadrons are completely gone.”


“We just took another missile hit, armor is holding.”


Commodore Douglas looked in despair at the tactical display in front of her. Her forces were arrayed in a rough sphere with the fragile carriers at the center, but she was heavily outnumbered and had far too few frontline ships. She had her fighter squadrons arrayed in an aggressive stance to turn away enemy ships from getting too close. For if the far numerically superior Alpha ships got in close, it would be all over.


“Frigates Sundown and Solstice, focus fire on that cruiser that just entered sector seven. Topaz squadron provide fighter cover!”
        
        “Cruiser Cold Fury, fall back to vector 5.18!”


        “Helmsman, take us behind the wreckage of that ship.”


        The enemy fleet surrounded them utterly, and the carcasses of many ships were starting to cover the area with debris fields. Fighters wove in and around the remnants of ships, dogfighting and carrying out bombing runs. The ISI corvettes of 3rd Fleet were doing a good job of keeping enemy fighters away, but the ever closing larger Alpha ships, especially their dangerous battlecruisers, were proving to be very lethal and Commodore Douglas had no way to counter them. If only the Dreadnaught was under her control, she could coordinate the battle much better.


        “Someone get me an update on the Argus!” Commodore Douglas yelled.

        ***
Zeke Relov
Lieutenant, 3rd Platoon
Aboard Dreadnaught Argus
3 Days to Disintegration


        “Negative Commodore, we haven’t secured the ship yet. No resistance yet.” Lieutenant Relov said.


        He motioned for first squad to take position, by the bridge bulkhead.


        “Try to take the bridge crew alive. You’ll need them to effectively pilot the ship.” Commodore Douglas said, in the midst of giving orders to her own command crew.


        “Yes sir, we are approaching the bridge now we —”


        The bulkhead to the bridge opened instantly and a storm of armor piercing rounds came from beyond. Lieutenant Relov’s first squad was cut down mercilessly.


        “Cover, take cover!” Zeke yelled, ending his transmission to Commodore Douglas.


        He dove down an auxiliary hallway, pissed that he had lost first squad to ISI forces. Firefights within a spaceship were always bloody, as there was little room to maneuver in the tight corridors of spacecraft. But Zeke was a marine, and anger only fueled his strength and increased his resolve.


        “Second squad hold them here, third squad, flank them to the right, fourth squad with me, we take them from the left.”


        The platoon split apart as ordered and promptly moved through secondary access ways to get to the bridge. Unfortunately for Zeke, the bridge of the Argus was specifically constructed with boarding parties in mind. Thus there were only two entrances at extreme choke points. The ISI did not want its prize vessel to ever get taken out from within.


“Second squad, get ready with those grenade launchers.”


Zeke approached the second bulkhead and blasted both sensors, rending the defenders within blind to his movements. He switched his rifle to fire grenades and waited.


The rear blast door opened just as suddenly as the first, and the defenders blindly fired from the other side. This time Zeke was behind cover and expecting the sudden influx of enemy shots.


“Second squad, do it!” Zeke ordered as he shot several antipersonnel grenades from behind cover, letting them bounce of a wall and right into the bridge. Combined with the grenades of second squad they exploded inside the bridge. A moment later both bulkheads sealed shut.


“You know the drill, get those bulkheads open.” Zeke said.


A pair of drones sprinted up to the bulkhead. One of the drones began using a laser to cut through the bulkhead, the other held the power supply. In a few seconds, the laser cut through and Zeke ran up to the bulkhead smashing through it with his armoured body. On the other side was the bridge, with the crew torn up from the grenades, but mostly still alive. He successfully ID’d commander Velen.


“Take their weapons and patch them up.” Zeke ordered his platoon on a private frequency. He changed it so he spoke out loud to everyone in the room. “Anyone who is still alive and can hear this, I need you to get out of this mess. Stand up and head with me to the auxiliary bridge. If you don’t, pray the Alpha fuckers kill you before I do.”


***


Ezelia Douglas
Commodore - Supercarrier Oslia
3rd Fleet, Command Echelon
In battle, Alpha 3
3 Days until Disintegration


        “We just lost our last cruiser! Enemy destroys are vectoring in on our carriers.”


        “Have our remaining frigates tighten their perimeter around the carriers!” Commodore Douglas ordered.


        “Commodore, a transmission from the Argus!”


        “Patch it through!” Douglas said.


        “Commodore, the ship is secured as requested.”


        “Move the ship to heading 1.93. Keep up the fire support.” Commodore Douglas commanded. 


        The Dreadnaught began moving as ordered and began its descent, moving far below the rest of the ISI fleet. Commodore Douglas came to the conclusion that there was only one way to finish this.


        “All remaining destroyers, form a ring around the Dreadnaught and blast through the Alpha forces.”


        The Dreadnaught, once again at the center of the fleet and fully active, became the main focus of the Alpha forces. But in its downward descent, most of the Alpha Forces were cut off by the few remaining carriers at the center of the ISI’s crumbling formation. The Dreadnaught and its destroyer escorts closed to point blank range with the enemy ships and began exchanging direct blows. The dreadnaught aimed each of its three ultra-heavy railguns at separate cruisers and opened fire, critically damaging each one. Hundreds of Alpha fighters and dozens of frigates swarmed either side of the ship. The escorting destroyers unleashed all their missiles and let loose as much ordinance as possible but were quickly overtaken and destroyed. The Dreadnaught shuddered as it bore the full might of its firepower on the overwhelming forces all around it. It continued further and further away from the center of the battle, dozens of point defense laser beams cutting away the missiles and fighters that hounded it like a swarm of deadly flies. Each of its railguns shots disabled enemy cruisers or outright annihilated smaller ships. But for all the Dreadnaught’s resilience, enemy fighters continued strafing it, tearing through its gigantic armor plates and into the subdecks underneath. Enemy frigates lined up with the dreadnaught and broadsided it, pounding it with their railguns and missiles. Many missiles got through the dreadnaughts impressive point defense and impacted along its sides.


        Commodore Douglas saw the speed at which the ship was progressing and took a deep breath. “Transfer all power to the engines. Maximum speed.”


        The Dreadnaught did as directed and slowly began outrunning all its pursuers with its massive engines. 


        Left behind, the remnants of 3rd Fleet once again became the primary target for Alpha Forces. Commodore Douglas stood up at the bridge of her ship.


        “It’s been an honor serving with you for the ISI,” she said.


        “An honor!” her crew saluted her.


        She gazed out as one by one, her carriers were focused down and destroyed until only her supercarrier remained. The Oslia shuddered brutally as railgun rounds slammed into it from all sides. Its hangar bays exploded and its decks began disintegrating under the onslaught of enemy fire. Right before the enemy missiles hit and annihilated the ship entirely, Commodore Douglas looked to where the Dreadnaught Argus was, far from any enemy forces. 


She had done her part, for better or for worse. 


Missiles slammed into the ship and the occupants of the bridge were instantly vaporized, tearing the once beautiful supercarrier into three separate pieces, floating through space, lost amidst the rest of the wreckage.


***


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
Fleet Rendezvous Point
2 days to Disintegration


“Comms!” Admiral Xin called out.


“Admiral.”


“Trace the source of that communications leak and send a response back to ISI command for confirmation!”


“Yes sir. Also Admiral, Commodore Steele is sending a transmission.”


“Commodore Steele. Are you en route?” Admiral Xin acknowledged.


“Yes Admiral, we are almost at your position. I’m starting to have problems with a few of the crews however.”


“Your marines are not on their ships?” Admiral Xin said.


“It’s not just the civilian vessels…” Commodore Steele trailed off.


“Then control your damn fleet Commodore! I can’t do it for you.” Admiral Xin said.


“But has there been anymore news? I want to make sure what I tell my fleet is the same as what you say.” Commodore Steele insisted.


“Tell them nothing for now. For all we know the message was some sort of ruse. It is not possible for every single ISI Core world to be attacked at the same time.” Admiral Xin said.


“The message was decoded with the highest encryption algorithm,” her Comm officer said.


        Admiral Xin turned to the comm officer and yelled, “Another comment from you and I’ll court martial you right here. Am I understood?”


        “Yes sir!” the frightened officer yelled back.


        “What is the status on that trace?” Admiral Xin demanded.


        “It originated within 1st Fleet, one of the civilian vessels. I’m narrowing it down now.” the comm officer said.


        Admiral Xin’s XO, Lieutenant Griffon, strode up to her and whispered in her ear, “what will you do once you find out which ship breached protocol?”


        “I’ll have to set an example.” Admiral Xin said.


        “If destroying a ship didn’t bring them into line, what do you think will?” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “Everything is falling apart Griffon, and now you are attacking me too? If you have are only going to question my authority then leave.” Admiral Xin said.


        “I only meant to look at it logically.” Lieutenant Griffon said imploringly.


        “Out of my sight!” Admiral Xin yelled, pointing towards the exit.


        As Lieutenant Griffon left the bridge, she noticed a number of her command staff staring at her.


        “We have a job to do people! 3rd Fleet is gone. All that remains of 5th Fleet is the heavily damaged dreadnaught. We just got the rug pulled from under us and the rest of the ISI is potentially under attack. That means that it is more important than ever to strike at Alpha Prime and end the threat once and for all. If any of you do not have the stomach to stay in this fight when things get rough, than you are weak and a coward.” Admiral Xin said, looking each one of her crew directly one at a time.


        They turned away, back to their consoles.


        “And someone get me a status on the dreadnaught!” Admiral Xin said.


***
Blake Griffon
Executive Officer Gleron’s Maul
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
Fleet Rendezvous Point
2 days to Disintegration


Lieutenant Griffon briskly walked through the halls of Gleron’s Mall to his quarters. He was a bit hurt that Admiral Xin would think he had anything but loyalty to her. Her dismissal of him was very painful, not because his own personal feelings, but because it confirmed his growing suspicions that Admiral Xin was losing control. Not just of the campaign and the crew, but of herself as well. In the fifteen years they had served together, not once had he seen her so overwhelmed and not once did she ever lash out at her own crew.


He finally reached his quarters and shut the door while simultaneously sending a transmission.


“Lieutenant Griffon, why are you contacting me on a private frequency?” Commodore Steele asked.
“It’s Admiral Xin, I think she’s losing it.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


“Losing what?” Commodore Steele asked angrily.


“Losing control, I’m afraid the stress of the campaign is too much for her to bear.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


“Listen Lieutenant, I have my own problems right now. I’ve been listening in to the private comms between starships and it's not looking good. Unless you have any evidence don’t contact me again. We’ve already had enough treason for a lifetime within the fleet.” Commodore Steele said, before slowly adding, “I’ll visit her in person just in case.”


He ended the transmission, leaving Lieutenant Griffon sitting in his quarters, alone.


***
Wilfred Moore
Captain - Shearing Talon, Commander 2nd Destroyer Squadron
1st Fleet, 2nd Destroyer Squadron
On Patrol, Fleet Rendezvous Point
4 hours to Disintegration


        Captain Moore gazed at the void of space, looking back to the pale white dwarf at the center of the system occasionally. All of the ISI worlds being under attack? It was unreal. Like a dream that lasted far too long and became far too unrealistic. He still had trouble believing that the Alpha Empire had completely finished off 3rd Fleet. Everything was going so well.
Captain Moore shunned the company of others unless absolutely necessary. And now more than ever he felt the need to look out into space, letting its vast unimaginable scale and limitless possibilities drown out his fear. It almost always worked. While the rest of his destroyer squadron busily chatted away, he remained alone. Cocooned in his thoughts.
But not here. Ever since he destroyed the Helping Hand, he found that looking out at the stars was not enough. At first he thought his guilt was too powerful for anything to help. That even the beauty of the universe could not ease the pain. But more and more he was convinced that it was something else. It was this system. The Alpha System. The longer he looked at the white dwarf, the more he knew in his heart that this system was dead.
The star was dead, a hollow husk of its former self. The planet’s were all dead. Of the three planets in the Alpha System, not one had any sort of native life or even air. The Alpha Empire too, they were nothing but machines now from what that one defector Delfina said. Alpha Prime itself was apparently one giant computer, a shallow mockery of life. They thought they brought transcendence through their technology. But their home system was proof enough that the only they brought was a bleak, pointless existence. They were death incarnate.


“Captain Moore, we request an audience.” Captain Wolfe messaged him.


Captain Moore sat up, his thoughts interrupted and confused by the sudden formality. He had a bad feeling about whatever was going on next.


“Very well, what is it?” Captain Moore said.


“We’ve been discussing, the other Captain’s and I…” Captain Wolfe said.


“Alright.” Captain Moore replied.


Captain Wolfe took a deep breath, “we are leaving the fleet. The message sent from the ISI was real. The worlds are under siege.”


An icy torrent shot through Captain Moore and his heart felt like it was going to burst. He struggled to fight the fear that clawed at his boots and threatened to overtake him.


“Garen… you can’t leave.” Captain Moore said stammered, “regardless if that message was right, we need to stay here and finish this!” 


“I can’t leave my family. We’ve all agreed to it.” Captain Wolfe said, the rest of the Captain’s nodded in agreement.


Captain Moore struggled to control himself. He began shaking and he curled his fists. He looked at Captain Wolfe, his face a contortion of pain.


“Garen, don’t make make me do this.” Captain Moore said shaking his head and his eyes watery. “You’re my best friend Garen! Goddamnit don’t do this! Don’t run away from this fight!”


“We are far enough from the rest of the Fleet that we can leave the system. You're the only ship out here that can stop us… and there are more of us than you. Come with us.” Captain Wolfe said grimly.


As he said those final words, his ship along with the other three left formation and began heading for the outskirts of the system.


“Lock onto the undying scorn! Prepare to launch missiles!” Captain Moore said, closing his eyes.


“Missiles locked!” 


“Don’t make me choose between the ISI and you.” Captain Moore said.


“I don’t have a choice Wilfred.” Captain Wolfe said.


“Should we fire?”


Captain Moore looked at the worried face of the fire control officer. He thought of all his time with the ISI. The atrocities of the Alpha Empire, all the years he had known Garen.


“Captain they are about to leave range!”


Captain Moore let out a yell and slammed his fist down.


“Hold your fire.” he said.


He looked up at the hologram of Captain Wolfe.


“Thank you.” Captain Wolfe said and cut the transmission.


***


Minhua Xin
Fleet Admiral
1st Fleet, Command Echelon
Fleet Rendezvous Point
30 minutes to Disintegration


“Admiral Xin, Captain Moore of Destroyer Squadron Two reports the rest of the squadron just disbanded!”


“They what?” Admiral Xin yelled in surprise.


“They just left. Abandoned us.” the sensors officer said in disbelief.


Admiral Xin took a step back and interlocked her hands in front of her.


“How… I…” Admiral Xin stammered. “Intercept — scramble an intercept!”


“At current trajectory they will phase out of system before we can catch up.”


“What about the destroyer, Captain Moore!” Admiral Xin exclaimed.


“He refuses to pursue them.” the comm officer said.


“Refuses to pursue?” Admiral Xin repeated in disbelief.


This was it. This was the Alpha Empire’s plan. This was the trap and they calculated it perfectly. The ISI Fleet was outmaneuvered, outgunned and now fractured entirely by the very emotions that made them human. The attacks on the ISI worlds, it was such perfect timing. No doubt Alpha spies had perfectly transmitted the message of their attack to the ISI Fleet.


“Admiral, six… no, seven more ships are leaving 2nd Fleet.”


“I’m reporting casualties within several civilian vessels, they have opened fire on the marines.”


“Admiral! Strike Group 2 is withdrawing from the system!” 


It clicked all of a sudden, every piece of a plan that she could not even fathom made sense as if she had known it all along. They had broken the spirit of their fleet on this dreaded world. And there was nothing, nothing she could do.


As her command staff relayed to her information, she began laughing. A silent chuckle at first but eventually a hysterical laugh that brought her to her knees.


***
Fredrick Steele
Commodore - Battleship Righteous Vengeance
Commander 2nd Fleet
2nd Fleet, Command Echelon
Docking with Gleron’s Maul
5 minutes to Disintegration


        “Commodore! Something’s happened to the admiral, you better come quick.” an officer said.


        Commodore Steele jumped out of the shuttle into the hangar bay of Gleron’s Maul as soon as the door opened. He sprinted towards the nearest service lift, slamming the button to make it ascend to the center of the ship. The officer that had messaged him had accidentally left the channel on.


        “What the fuck is she doing?” someone said. 


        “Guys, another strike group just abandoned the fleet!” someone else said.


        “By the ISI!” someone shrieked and more screaming followed.


        Commodore Steele ran out of the service lift and straight towards the bridge. He saw the crew all looking at Admiral Xin, her eyes wide and with a slight smile on her lips as she slowly raised her sidearm to her head. 


        Commodore Steele leaped and tackled Admiral Xin to the ground, making her discharge several shots from her pistol. He slammed her hand against the cold metal of the floor until her bloodied hand let go of the pistol. One of the deck officers snatched the weapon away.


        “Let me do this.” Admiral Xin said desperately.


        “No. We are not defeated yet.” Commodore Steele said.


        He got off Admiral Xin and pointed to two officers. “Get her to a detention area now. Somewhere she can’t hurt herself.”


        They took Admiral Xin as ordered and dragged her out of the room. She did not resist.


        “Comms? who is the communication officer here!” Commodore Steele ordered.


        “I am.” An officer raised her hand.


        “Patch me to all ISI ships in system.” Commodore Steele said. He cleared his throat and saw the officer give the signal that he was transmitting.


        “All ISI ships fleeing the system or contemplating it. What do you wish to accomplish? Save your family? Your friends? Your city? Do you believe you will make any difference. Each of those worlds had a full fleet defending it. Do you truly think your handful of ships will make any difference! You leaving right now plays right into the hands of the Alpha Empire! They wanted this. They counted on your sympathy to those back home. They calculated the exact time to release that message, to capitalize on your war weariness and desire to see this campaign ended! If you go back you will accomplish nothing save dooming this campaign and resigning to let the Alpha Empire reign over you.
        “I do not know if you leave because of altruistic intentions for those you care about or cowardly intentions after seeing the fate of 3rd Fleet. It matters not to me. What matters is you are abandoning your duty, your honor and your comrades in arms. Traitor does not even begin to cover it.
        “If you do not listen with your minds or with your sense of duty, listen with your hearts. We are in the very heart of Alpha territory. They are terrified of us now. We have the power to destroy Alpha Prime and end this conflict — forever! Should you run away, the Alpha Empire will not stop until every single one of you is turned into a mindless husk, serving their computational overlord. Running away today will only lead to your eventual demise, as it would all humanities.
        “Stand with my a while longer. Charge with me to Alpha Prime and vanquish this inhuman enemy that we have been fighting for decades. We will be victorious, by our ancestors of Earth, I promise you this.”
        Commodore Steele stepped back and watched the tactical display as several dozen ships continued their journey from the system. He let out a long sigh and stepped away from the tactical display.


        “Then all hope is truly lost.” Commodore Steele said.


        “Commodore, look!”


        He turned back towards the display hesitantly, and saw as more than half the ships suddenly stopped. More and more ships halted until only six were still escaping. Gradually,half the ships that stopped began turning and traveling at full speed back towards the Fleet Rendezvous. The other half regrettably continued leaving the system.


        Commodore Steele turned to the command crew, analyzing them. “As sole fleet commander still in command, I am taking control of all remaining ISI ships in the system, are there any objections… I didn’t think so. Now, I want ship reports, readouts on the enemy, and status of the ship! We are merging all remaining fleets into 1st Fleet, see to it people!”


***


Fredrick Steele
Commander ISI Fleet
Commodore Righteous Fury
ISI Rendezvous Point


        “What do we have. Ship report first.” Commodore Steele said.


        He addressed all command crews of Righteous Fury, Gleron’s Maul and The Dreadnaught Argus.


        “Our fleet strength is effectively halved. Most of our cruisers remain, however a significant amount of support ships have already left the system. Luckily, the dreadnaught Argus is back to full operational capacity.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “So soon?” Commodore Steele asked.


        “It was specifically designed to square off against a massive number of enemy ships.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “What about enemy positions, what do we know?” Commodore Steele asked.


        The sensors officer stood up and switched the tactical display to zoom in on Alpha Prime. “The enemy reinforcement fleet responsible for the destruction of 3rd Fleet has regrouped back at Alpha Prime, joined by the original fleet there and their colossal space station. Alpha 3 remains secure against further threats with a large array of orbital defenses and a handful of starships.”


        Commodore Steele stroked his beard, looking intently at the tactical screen. “And what of our logistics situation?”


        “Without most of our support vessels, the fleet can operate for no more than a week before starting to run out of fuel, munitions and other supplies.” the logistics officer responded.


        “Well looks like Alpha 3 will have to wait, perhaps forever. We don’t have the supplies or ships to take it and take Alpha Prime.” Commodore Steele said. “So that leaves us with one question.”


        “And that question is?” Lieutenant Griffon asked.


        “How the Hell we are going to take out Alpha Prime. I want all options on the table.” Commodore Steele said.


        Lieutenant Griffon spoke first, “we could send a ship back to the ISI Core worlds, wait for reinforcements.”


        One of the tactical officers from Gleron’s Maul spoke up, “we stand a good chance of running out of supplies by then.”


        “I agree, seems like too big a risk for potentially nothing.” Commodore Steele said.


        A familiar, unexpected voice suddenly spoke up. “Alpha Prime itself is thoroughly defended against orbital bombardments,” said Admiral Velen.


Commodore Steele noted the panicking expression on Lieutenant Griffon’s face. “Sir!” he began saying.


Commodore Steele raised his hand, silencing the Lieutenant, “relax, I ordered he join us in an advisory capacity. I am still in command of the mission. You were saying Admiral Velen.”


Admiral Velen rubbed his face where a large shard of an antipersonnel grenade had cut clean through. “As I was saying, an orbital bombardment would be ineffective, the planet is too large to dismantle like we did Alpha 2, not to mention the lack of ships. Or that we would not be able to stay in orbit long enough —”
“Your point Admiral,” Commodore Steele said.


“My point being that the planet is in reality one megastructure, a computer actually if our intelligence is correct, which so far it has been of course.”


“Your suggesting a ground assault.” Commodore Steele said.


“I feel it would be the best way to disable the Alpha Empire. They put so many things into building the thing that without it they will lose all their command and control abilities.” Admiral Velen said. “We don’t have enough ships to take them out conventionally thanks to recent events.”


“Even with the insertion of ground teams, how would we take out the computer, its superstructure runs throughout the planet.” Commodore Steele said.


“That is the part I wasn’t sure about.” Admiral Velen said, “maybe we could target its cooling system.”


        “That wouldn’t work, it would just shut down until that module was repaired.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “What if we overloaded it?” Captain Moore said, causing everyone’s heads to turn.


        As a Captain of an entire Destroyer Squadron he was in the conversation, but marginalized so that his head was rendered very small alongside all the other squadron leaders. Now, every ship in the fleet expanded him to fill up the main screen.


        “What did you say?” Commodore Steele said.


        “We overload it.” Captain Moore repeated. “No doubt it has safety shut off switches for when it begins to overheat. So that wouldn’t work. But if we were to manually surge a massive amount of power into it, the electronics within are too delicate to resist it and they would all be destroyed, killing the computer. From the surface scans it seems the entire computer is powered by geothermal energy. There is no way they have accounted for such a massive fluctuation.”


        “But how do we deliver the power you speak of?” Lieutenant Griffon asked.


        “My ship, the Shearing Talon.”


        “Excuse me?” Admiral Velen said.


        “My ship, I’ll dock it on the surface and directly interface with the planetary computer from there. The fusion core of my ship will overload the computer.” Captain Moore said.
        “And how do you plan on getting in position to interface with the computer.” Lieutenant Griffon said.


        “That’s where the ground assault comes in. No doubt the planet has numerous docking bays, but they are all locked from underground. The ground team would either have to unlock a hangar or blast it open.” Captain Moore said.


        “This plan is ridiculous,” Admiral Velen said.


        “No. This plan will work.” Commodore Steele said.


        “You can’t be serious,” Admiral Velen said.


        “I am. We don’t have enough firepower in the entire fleet to take out that monstrosity down there. This is the only way. We’ll take what’s left of the ISI Fleet, ram it straight through to the planet’s surface and destroy that damnable computer. If anyone has a better idea say it now.” Commodore Steele said.
        
        Commodore Steele surveyed the hundred or so faces of every captain, and command level officer in front of him. He saw the worry in their eyes. The fear that either this mission would fail or that there would be nothing to return to if they succeeded. But Commodore Steele would not let this campaign fail.


        “Captain Moore, are you sure you are up to this?” Commodore Steele asked.


        “Absolutely, sir.” Captain Moore replied.


        “Now I want security detail to escort Admiral Velen back into detention.” Commodore Steele said.


        “Detention? You need me!” Admiral Velen said.


        “I did not forget your mutinous actions Admiral. The ISI courts will decide your fate.” Commodore Steele said.


        “If they still exist.” Admiral Velen said as he was escorted away.
        
        Commodore Steele turned back to everyone else, “Our fleet may have taken a beating, but we are still here, and there are more than enough ships to keep those Alpha bastards at bay. I’ll send out more detailed orders per squadron. Dismissed!”


        “Lieutenant Griffon,” Commodore Steele said, right as Griffon turned to leave.


        “Yes sir.” he replied.


        “I want you to take command of the Argus.” Commodore Steele said.


        “Me sir? Control the Dreadnaught?.” Lieutenant Griffon asked.


        “Yes Captain Griffon, I need someone I can trust. Are you capable?” Commodore Steele said.


        “Capable? Yes sir! I am, thank you sir.” Captain Griffon said.


        “Don’t thank me yet,” Commodore Steele said, “I’m afraid not many of us will survive this.” 


***
Fredrick Steele
Commander ISI Fleet
Commodore Righteous Fury
In Attack Position, Alpha Prime


        “All ships in position Commodore.”


        “You all know your duties. Carry them out with bravery, and the ISI will persevere.” Commodore Steele said. “Begin phase one.”


        The ISI Fleet was arrayed in a relatively dense formation, with ships interlocking fields of fire to form a tight defense. In the front of the formation where the Battleships Gleron’s Maul and Righteous Fury along with the Dreadnaught Argus. They were arrayed in a three point formation that could deliver devastating firepower.
        Just behind them were all thirty remaining ISI Frigates, loaded to the brim with every single marine and ground assault vehicle in the Fleet. Drop pods were prepared for insertion. Tactical gunships were fueled and ready, as were the much larger drop ships carrying assault vehicles. 
        Just behind the frigates were carriers, carrying squadrons of fighters dedicated to protecting the fleet and a single squadron to strafe the surface of the planet. They would prove crucial against the heavily defended surface.
        All around the frigates and carriers were cruisers and destroyers, arrayed in close formation to prevent the enemy from dispatching any of the frigates necessary for ground assault or the carriers. The cruisers and destroyers, dedicated warships in their own right, formed a protective layer over the sides and back of the fleet in all directions.


        In this formation, the ISI Fleet advanced on Alpha Prime, whose defenders prepared to meet them.
        The massive space stations around Alpha Prime buzzed with activity. Thousands of starfighters exited the countless hangars and lined up in perfect little formations alongside the more powerful battlecruisers. Enormous turrets swiveled on the nearest space station and began tracking the ISI Fleet. All sorts of non-combat vessels detached and headed to the opposite end of the planet.


        The three foremost ships of the ISI formation came into range.


        “Open fire!” ordered Commodore Steele.


        Simultaneously, the Righteous Fury, Gleron’s Maul and the Argus fired their railguns directly at presighted positions of the space station directly in front of them. The tungsten rods sailed through space for twelve seconds before impacting with titanic force against the station’s weak points. Because the station was so long lengthwise, centrifugal forces from the sudden strain in the station’s junctions began tearing the station apart slowly. The station’s own guns responded in kind, accelerating their own fifty ton tungsten rods right at the three ISI ships. Two of them caught Gleron’s Maul directly in the front, slamming against it and tearing off it’s own railgun. But Gleron’s Maul, like all warships, was the most heavily armored at the front, absorbing the damage throughout its superstructure and dispensing most of the energy through its armor.


        “Another round! Fire, fire!” Commodore Steele said.


        The monstrous ISI ships fired again, at the same targets, further weakening the gigantic station’s critical junctions. Surface damage appeared significant, massive tears in the station began to show. The titanium alloy of the station was powerful however, and kept the station intact. The station’s guns fired again. The Righteous Fury took a direct hit on its front, sending a jolt through the rest of the ship. Commodore Steele gripped his seat. Three rounds struck against the Dreadnaught Argus, two of them deflecting and the other being harmlessly absorbed by the behemoth of a ship.


        “Hit it again. Center junction.” Commodore Steele said confidently, eyeing the station closely.


        The three ships once more fired, this time all at the same target, hitting it with their combined firepower and ripping straight through it’s armor, annihilating the junction and causing the entirety of the station to split into two, causing tremors to race through it.


        “Begin phase two.”
        
        The ISI Fleet accelerated towards Alpha Prime. The defending station’s guns could no longer point at the enemy fleet because of the rotation it was put in. However, Two dozen enemy cruisers were in position around the station, with hundreds more coming in from either side of the system. The three vanguard ISI ships once more opened fire, this time on the enemy cruisers. Three enemy cruisers were blown apart, their decks drifting apart into the skies of Alpha Prime. The remaining Alpha cruisers accelerated towards the approaching ISI Fleet. No longer were they outside of the larger ISI ships’ range, and they opened fire themselves, launching missiles, firing their railguns and sending forth their fighter squadrons. 


“This is where it get’s ugly, alright position two, position two!” Commodore Steele said.


The three largest ISI ships slowed down and let the rest of their fleet overtake them. A wave of destroyers and cruisers took their place at the front, firing of their own munitions at the approaching Alpha forces. The largest ISI ships fired once more, and another three cruisers were obliterated. The ISI cruisers and destroyers kept accelerating towards the Alpha ships, and the missiles of both sides found their marks. Two Alpha Empire cruisers broke apart while an ISI cruisers was vaporized along with it’s two destroyer escorts. Alpha and ISI fighters met halfway between the two ships, half of them engaging each other while the other half went to harass the larger ships. The two fleets closed into point blank range and began exchanging vicious barrages, causing instant casualties for both sides. The ISI Fleet pounded at the few remaining Alpha Empire Cruisers, but also had to switch focus on the orbital emplacements and the fracture space station, filled with weapons emplacements that consistently spiraled into position.


The Commodore watched as the ships of both fleets intermingled with each other in a desperate conquest. But the moment he saw the nearby Alpha Empire forces were completely engaged, he gave the next order.


“Initiate Phase 3.”


Immediately, all the ISI frigates broke away from the fleet and cruised straight through the battle into the upper atmosphere of Alpha Prime. Hundreds of assault shuttles, gunships and dropships descended from the frigates as drop pods shot out from underneath them. In response, emplacements from all over Alpha Prime began firing missiles and other anti-aircraft fire into the sky. Hundreds of brightly illuminated rounds of ammunition rose from the surface of the planet to intersect the paths of incoming ISI invasion ships.


Zeke Relov
Lieutenant, 3rd Platoon Cruiser Impeccable
Descending to Alpha Prime


        “This shit’s like nothing I’ve ever seen.” Zeke said.


        Of course no one responded, the pilot and all of the squad with him inside the gunship were drones.
        
        “I know. I really hope you make it through this.” Zeke muttered.
        “Thank you.” Zeke said to himself.


        “Lieutenant Relov, are you talking to yourself again?” Sergeant Gest’s voice came into his headset.


        Zeke must have accidentally kept transmitting to the rest of the platoon instead of just the squad. Hopefully that would be the only mistake he made. The thought was brutally cut short as the gunship detached from the frigate it was riding on and fell into freefall above Alpha Prime. The gunship juked heavily as it’s engines came on and it began maneuvering. Zeke’s eyes widened as he realized the scale of the conflict before him.


        Directly below the gunship, two cruisers were exchanging fire, unloading brutal onslaughts of missiles, railguns and even point defense guns at each other. The gunship flew swerved to avoid a friendly frigate and fell into formation with four other gunships diving directly down, in between the two cruisers firing at each other. Zeke watched as missiles flew right past him and into one of the cruisers, the final blow needed to break it and cause it to begin crashing into the planet, billowing large clouds of smoke in the upper atmosphere.


        He looked to either side and saw more gunships and larger dropships descending quickly on the planet, they dove further and further towards the desert plains of the planet and the surrounding massive structures. The space battle was above them now, only pieces of wreckage and starfighters chasing each other still at their altitude. But vicious anti-air fire came from below, explosions and supersonic rounds surrounded the air around the gunship. One of the gunships exploded as a couple of rounds blew right through it, causing the rest of the gunships to split formation.        


        The surface was quite close now, and the flak from the surface intensified. As he looked towards the ground, he could see fighting on the ground begin. ISI starfighters strafed the ground with missiles, knocking out Alpha weapon emplacements. ISI gunships were disgorging their troops and lifting off again to fire on the enemy as well. The conflict stretched all the way to the horizon and back. Their goal was to find anywhere Captain Moore could make a direct connection to the central computer.


        A few stray rounds tore into the gunship, tearing off one of the engines and shaking the gunship as the remaining three engines struggled to compensate. Zeke held his breath, trying to imagine that the ship was not currently on fire and trailing smoke. The sensation of freefall suddenly stopped and the rear hatch opened. His restraints automatically released. Without hesitation he grabbed his rifle and hopped off the gunship onto the sand five meters below. The rest of his squad landed beside him and the gunship took off, circling around and firing missiles at an unseen enemy.


        Zeke enhanced the magnification of his helmet lenses and sighted the closest Alpha entrance into the planet. A few artillery shells greeted him and let him know he had been spotted. He began sprinting across the dunes towards the nearest entrance, the next wave of ISI troops already landing behind him.


***
Fredrick Steele
Commander ISI Fleet
Commodore Righteous Fury
In Orbit, Alpha Prime


        Commodore Steele watched the last Alpha cruiser in the area explosively shatter. It could not last against the several ISI vessels surrounding it. He keyed the tactical screen to zoom out and watched two Alpha Fleets assemble in far orbit, on either side of the ISI invasion. As soon as they were in position, they would counterattack his bloodied fleet with far superior numbers.
        The Alpha Station Commodore Steele had focused fire on was still quite a nuisance, even if it was starting to shatter into many pieces. Hidden hardpoints all over the station contained numerous deadly surprises, mostly in the form of missiles. Also, anti-orbital ordnance kept being launched from the surface of the planet, further causing damage to the fleet.
        He was unsure how long the fleet could hold its position once the Alpha forces committed to their attack. This made it that much more imperative for the ground assault to succeed in a timely manner.


        “Get me Major Szaf,” Commodore Steele said.


        A moment later came the heavy labored breathing of Major Szaf. “Szaf here.”


        “Major, what’s the status of the ground assault, have you secured an appropriate landing spot?”


        “We’ve neutralized most of the surface defenses so our reinforcements are getting down without an issue but our air support is no longer useful. Resistance increases substantially the lower we go, we’ve got no available LZ yet. I’m having the frigates provide focused orbital fire to drill holes in noncritical sections so our troops can filter through.”


        “Have the Alpha forces caught onto our plan yet?” Commodore Steele said.


        “Negative.” Major Szaf said. “All evidence points to them leaving their equipment intact. But we haven’t been able to penetrate their defenses yet.” Major Szaf said.


        “Commodore,” the Sensors Officer said, “enemy Fleet has begun their counterattack.”


        “Keep pushing them, time is not with us.” Commodore Steele said.


***


Zeke Relov
Lieutenant, 3rd Platoon Cruiser Impeccable
Alpha Prime Surface


        Zeke heard a metallic pinging of something metal bouncing off metal walls. Rifle grenade. Zeke ran three steps and dove onto the ground. He felt the grenade explode a moment later, nudging his armored form slightly. He stood up and noticed his suit had a few pieces of shrapnel protruding out of it.
        He was deep in one of Alpha Prime’s hallways now, his squad heavily spread out over several floors of the base. The walls constantly shuddered as distant booms came at regular intervals. So many different things could be causing those noises, but he only cared about what lay around the corner in front of him. Three times he tried to rush that corridor, and three times he was repelled. The first two times he had his drone squadmates alongside him. 
        Zeke shoved his last belt of grenades into his gun. Whatever those Alpha lackeys were guarding was important, but he really had no means to breach it. The hallway in between him and that control room was torn to pieces by grenades and rifle fire, blanketed by the robotic corpses of ISI and Alpha alike.


        A transmission came from Major Szaf, “we are running out of time here. Redouble your efforts. Send these bastards back to whatever Hell they came from. We are about to lose fleet support.”


        The entirety of the structure began shaking. The seismic activity was so intense he started wobbling and was pushed from one side of the hall to the other, barely able to keep a sense of direction. He wouldn’t get another opportunity like this one.
        Mid Quake, he stumbled towards the enemy as fast as the shaky ground let him, and as soon as he rounded the dreaded corner, he let loose all of his remaining grenades, letting them bounce past his line of sight and explode. He continued haphazardly towards the control room and rounded the corner, letting loose on full auto from his rifle into the hallway of disorganized Alpha soldiers.
        Half of them were already on the ground, critically injured from the grenades. The other half fell in front of Zeke’s unstoppable rampage, but not before returning fire. Zeke kept firing until his magazine was completely empty, watching the rounds penetrate directly through armor and ripping into drone and human bodies alike. He watched as the last Alpha soldier slumped against the wall, leaving a red smear against it. To the right he saw a large window overlooking a large docking station. Exactly what he needed. He quickly keyed in the command to open it. He opened a transmission to Major Szaf to inform him, but when he opened his mouth no sound came out. He realized right then and there that he had a hole, blasted clear through the front and out the back of his armor around his midsection.


        Shit. He collapsed on his knees, and then to the floor.


Wilfred Moore
Captain - Destroyer Shearing Talon
In Low Orbit, Alpha Prime


        “Captain Moore you are free to land! I repeat you are free to land!” Major Szaf’s voice came through.


        “Copy that, beginning my approach now.” Captain Moore said.


        He personally piloted the sleek destroyer, bringing it down amongst the low orbiting frigates and into the atmosphere of Alpha Prime. Further above, he watched as the Alpha fleet closed in from all sides, the space battle resumed once more. This was it.


        He maneuvered with grim determination, dropping onto the planet at maximum speed. The surface fight raged on, Alpha forces from all regions of the planet had regrouped and counterattacked not just in space but also on the ground and in the sky. Alpha gunships engaged ISI gunships in the skies and giant clouds of dust billowed high into the air from encroaching Alpha Empire tanks.
        
        “Enemy gunships closing in fast.” His XO said.


        “Get the point defense systems on them.” Captain Moore ordered in frustration.


        “They can’t track well in this gravity!” his XO said.


        “Then fire the missiles!” Captain Moore yelled.


        His XO hesitated for a moment before launching the missiles.


        The gunships fired their own missiles against the much larger destroyer before turning away. The enemy missiles were tiny and well suited for flying through the air nimbly, out maneuvering the Shearing Talon’s point defense systems and striking right between its central armor and engines. Captain Moore heard someone scream in pain and felt air rush through the ship, not a good sign.
        But the missiles they sent after the gunships detonated by proximity. These missiles were not the same as those of the gunship. Instead of engaging ground and air vehicles, these missiles were the missiles used consistently in space throughout the entire campaign, intended to blast right through whatever it hit. As soon as those missiles detonated, the gunships vanished under several massive cloud that blinded all that looked at it, spewing radiation throughout the sky and coloring it crimson.
        
        The nuclear explosions at such close proximity shook the ship and strained it’s engines as it became less and less aerodynamic. Sensors were completely scrambled by the radiation, Captain Moore was essentially flying blind.


        “Sensors are scrambled!” his XO yelled.


“I know! I know!” Captain Moore yelled back, flying the ship towards where the open docking bay was supposed to be. He cleared the radioactive clouds and found the surface of Alpha Prime to be far closer than it should have been. He attempted to lift the destroyer, but it didn’t comply in the atmosphere, instead dropping onto the surface and dragging its under section across the sand. Horrendous metal grinding sounds came from beneath him.


“There go our railguns…” one of the gunners yelled.


Captain Moore struggled to maintain control of the ship, it didn’t want to come off the ground. No surprise considering spacecraft were never meant to be this low on a planet’s surface. He spotted the docking bay right in front and let the destroyer drop right into it with a giant thud. His face slammed right through the console in front of him, breaking it, the restraints barely keeping him in his seat. At last, the ship had stopped. The rest of his command crew began trying to pick themselves up after the sudden deceleration and drop.


        “The fusion core. Please tell me it’s still intact!” Captain Moore said out of breath, his eyes wide in fear.


        “The core, she’s stable captain.” his XO replied. “Qellen and Huckteer are dead.”


        “Damn good engineers. Let’s get to work before we join them.” Captain Moore said as he got out of his seat.


        “Captain! Quite an entrance you made. We’ve identified a power terminal, we think it runs through the superstructure but we can’t be sure.” Major Szaf’s voice came through.


        Captain Moore ran down the length of the destroyer, wincing when he saw the hole caused by the missile impact. He continued to the rear hatch where a ladder descended onto the ground.


        ISI marines had secured the docking bay, and one of them ran up to him. Pointing at a large power intake on the wall.


        “That, right there!” Major Szaf said.


        “Alright this should work.” Captain Moore said, walking up to the three meter wide power coupling.
        “I’m ordering what’s left of the division to regroup here and set up a ring of defensive positions, but we’re still vulnerable to long distance missile strikes.” Major Szaf said.


        “Yeah, okay, okay. Hurry up I got it.” Captain Moore said running back to his ship.


        “Hey! Get our emergency power coupling out! Set the fusion core to minimum output and don’t sync it yet.” Captain Moore said, waving his hands towards the ship.


        A moment later the Shearing Talon’s emergency power coupling came out: a wide shaft meant for powering buildings, surface defenses, small space stations and the like. But it came out crooked and when it extended to maximum length, sparks started to let loose.


        “Oh shit.” Captain Moore said.


        “Oh shit?” Major Szaf said.


        “The couplings damaged. Run a diagnostic!” Captain Moore said.


        “Power transfer is still possible, but its containment shield rubbed off.” his XO said.


        “What’s that mean?” Major Szaf asked.


        “Mean’s get your troops to their shuttles. This power transfer is only going to end one way.” Captain Moore said.


        “Then you will be vulnerable.” Major Szaf said defiantly.


        “Close the hangar doors and get the Hell out.” Captain Moore said, staring at Major Szaf’s polarized faceplate. “This won’t take long.”


        Major Szaf stared at him for a moment longer before gripping Captain Moore’s pauldron with respect. He let go and backed away.


        “All forces, back in the air, back in the air! We are pulling out.” Major Szaf said.


        “You have five minutes until the transfer is ready, I won’t wait.” Captain Moore said.


        Major Szaf nodded as he activated his jump pack and rocketed out through the top of the hangar bay. The other ISI marines quickly fell in line after him, the hangar doors closing as they shot out one by one.


        “Captain Moore, why are the ground forces retreating!” Commodore Steele said suddenly.


        “Commodore I am in position and about transfer power. The connection will be very unstable. They won’t be any more good down here.” Captain Moore said.


        “How unstable?” Commodore Steele asked.


        “We won’t be having another conversation again.” Captain Moore said, dead serious.


        ‘And the Alpha computer?” Commodore Steele asked.


        “If it talked before, it shouldn’t talk again.” Captain Moore said.


        “And they won’t try to isolate you from the power grid?” Commodore Steele pressed on.


        “It’s not data, it’s power. They have to physically destroy all the connections to stop raw energy from traveling through. But the power grid runs across the entirety of the planet, there is no way they can cut off all access this quickly.” Captain Moore said.


        “Very well. I’ll see you on the other side.” Commodore Steele said.


        “Indeed Commodore. Indeed.” Captain Moore said.


        The transmission ended. Captain Moore took a deep breath and climbed the ladder back into the Shearing Talon.


        “We got movement in the halls. Thirty seconds to contact.” His XO said.


        “Get the gunners to manually operate the point defense.” Captain Moore said on his way to the engineering subdeck.
        
        “Yes sir.” His XO said, processing the full meaning of what Captain Moore just said.


        Captain Moore hopped down into the engineering subdeck and saw the entire area where the controls for the power coupling were was just a giant charred hole. Engineering was where the missiles had hit.


        “Damn it. Alright guys, stay tight on that point defense. I have to go back outside and align it manually.” Captain Moore said.


        “I’m heading out with you.” his XO said, “you’ll need the help.”


        Captain Moore nodded and hopped out, right next to his XO. The Alpha troops finally spilled out onto the deck above and began opening fire at both of them, forcing them to break into a crazed sprint to the other side of the Shearing Talon where the power couplings awaited connection.
        One of his gunners aligned the point defense gun a moment later and swept a concentrated burst of ultraviolet light across the deck, roasting all the Alpha troops within their armor. Their smoking remains dropped to the ground.


“Alright come on,” Captain Moore said.


Both he and his XO rushed out of cover and strained to connect the power couplings. Their mechanical joints on their suits hissed angrily as they put immense force against the massive power coupling and guided it into place.
Alpha troops started spilling out from multiple entrances on multiple decks simultaneously, firing handheld rockets at the ship as the point defense lasers swept over them. Just as Captain Moore and his XO locked the power couplings in place, an Alpha soldier from a rear entryway came upon them. Captain Moore’s XO turned to face the soldier and took a supersonic round through his head, crumpling onto the ground. Captain moore whipped out his sidearm and sent three rounds into the troopers chest, knocking him onto the ground.
        
        “Fusion core to fifty percent! Sync it to the emergency coupling!” Captain Moore yelled out.


        Power began flowing through the coupling and directly into Alpha Prime, straining its already saturated power grid. The coupling began to glow red and started discharging static power with anything nearby, increasingly unable to ferry the power in its damaged state.


        Alpha soldiers were all over the docking bay now and were starting to get inside the Shearing Talon. The soldier who had killed his XO was beginning to stand up. There was no delaying the inevitable.


        “Fusion core to 1000 percent!” Captain Moore yelled.


        “Fuck all of you!” Captain Moore yelled as power surged from the fusion core into Alpha Prime. 


        And as the soldier that killed his XO stood up, he aimed his pistol carefully at the soldier’s head and fired, downing him instantly.


        “And fuck you in particular.” Captain Moore said.


        As the fusion core of the Shearing Talon reacted to its full potential, it surged all the produced power, the power of the sun, right into the power grid of Alpha Prime’s computer. The already damaged power coupling began hemorrhaging fusion energy and instantly incinerated Captain Moore and the Alpha Prime soldiers in the docking bay. A moment later, the Shearing Talon’s fusion reactor went critical and exploded, sending the last wave of energy into the planetary grid.
        The power grid, at maximum capacity already because of the ISI invasion, maximum power was sent to the defensive batteries all across the planet. The already strained power grid started rupturing from the catastrophic levels of power flowing through it, shattering and exploding immediately thereafter in a cascade originating from the docking bay, traveling all throughout the planet. Massive subterranean power lines detonated lightning fast all across the planet, lines of fire visible from above.
The cascading wave of power reached the first logic control tower of the Alpha Prime computer, and the impossibly fragile floor after floor of logic control units, memory and processors were shattered. Information conduits laden with semiconductors overloaded and carried the destruction to different sections of the planet. These destructive shockwaves reached the AI mainframe and ripped the carefully aligned core apart.


Every single piece of the Alpha Prime computer shattered and it was no more.


In orbit, the besieged and outnumbered ISI Fleet seized the moment of Alpha confusion to load up their frigates with ground troops and blast free of the battle. The Alpha Empire, deprived of its mind and integration did not give chase and remained orbiting the system, stunned entirely.


The ISI Fleet entered into phase, uncertain if anything remained of any of their homes.






****************************************